
THE STARLING 

IT'S an odd thing how one changes . . . 
Walking along the upper ranges 
Of this land of plains, 
In this month of rains, 

On a drying road where the poplars march along, 
Suddenly, 

With a rush of wings flew down a company, 
A multitude, throng upon throng, 
Of starlings. 

Successive orchestras of song, 
Flung, like the babble of surf, 
On to the roadside turf — 



And so, for a mile, for a mile and a half — a long way. 
Flight follows flight 
Thro' the still grey light 
Of the steel-grey day. 

Whirling beside the road in clamorous crowds, 
Never near, never far, in the shade of the poplars and 
clouds. 



It's an odd thing how one changes . . . 

And what strikes me now as most strange is : 

After the starlings had flown 

Over the plain and were gone. 

There was one of them stayed on alone 

In the trees ; it chattered on high, 

Lifting its bill to the sky, 

Distending its throat, 

Crooning harsh note after note. 

In soliloquy, 

Sitting alone. 

c 33 



And after a hush 
It gurgled as gurgled a well, 
Warbled as warbles a thrush, 
Had a try at the sound of a bell 

And mimicked a jay 

But I, 

Whilst the starling mimicked on high 

Pulsing its throat and its wings, 

I went on my way 

Thinking of things, 

Onwards and over the range 

And that's what is strange. 

I went down 'twixt tobacco and grain. 

Descending the chequer board plain 

Where the apples and maize are ; 

Under the loopholed gate 

In the village wall 

Where the goats clatter over the cobbles 

And the intricate, straw-littered ways are . . . 

The ancient watchman hobbles 

Cloaked, with his glasses of horn at the end of his 

nose. 
Wearing velvet short hose 
And a three-cornered hat on his pate. 
And his pike-staff and all. 
And he carries a proclamation. 
An invitation. 
To great and small, 
Man and beast 
To a wedding feast, 
And he carries a bell and rings . . . 
From the steeple looks down a saint, 
From a doorway a queenly peasant 
Looks out, in her bride-gown of lace 
And her sister, a quaint little darling 
Who twitters and chirps like a starling. 
34 



And this little old place, 

It's so quaint, 

It's so pleasant; 

And the watch bell rings, and the church bell rings 

And the wedding procession draws nigh, 

Bullock carts, fiddlers and goods. 

But I 

Pass on my way to the woods 

Thinking of things. 

Years ago I'd have stayed by the starling, 

Marking the iridescence of his throat. 

Marvelling at the change of his note ; 

I'd have said to the peasant child : " Darling 

Here's a groschen and give me a kiss" . . . I'd have 

stayed 
To sit with the bridesmaids at table. 
And have taken my chance 
Of a dance 

With the bride in her laces 
Or the maids with the blonde, placid faces 
And ribbons and crants in the stable . . . 

But the church bell still rings 

And I'm far away out on the plain. 

In the grey weather amongst the tobacco and grain. 

And village and gate and wall 

Are a long grey line with the church over all 

And miles and miles away in the sky 

The starlings go wheeling round on high 

Over the distant ranges. 

The violin strings 

Thrill away and the day grows more grey. 

And I ... I stand thinking of things. 

Yes, it's strange how one changes. 



C2 35 



IN THE LITTLE OLD MARKET- 
PLACE 

(To THE Memory of A.V.) 

IT rains, it rains, 
From gutters and drains 
And gargoyles and gables : 
It drips from the tables 
That tell us the tolls upon grains, 
Oxen, asses, sheep, turkeys and fowls 
Set into the rain-soaked wall 
Ofthe old Town Hall. 

The mountains being so tall 

And forcing the town on the river. 

The market's so small 

That, with the wet cobbles, dark arches and all. 

The owls 

(For in dark rainy weather the owls fly out 

Well before four), so the owls 

In the gloom 

Have too little room 

And brush by the saint on the fountain 

In veering about. 

The poor saint on the fountain ! 
Supported by plaques of the giver 
To whom we're beholden ; 
His name was de Sales 
And his wife's name von Mangel. 
(Now is he a saint or archangel ?) 
He stands on a dragon 
On a ball, on a column 
Gazing up at the vines on the mountain ; 
And his falchion is golden, 
36 



And his wings are all golden. 

He bears golden scales 

And in spite of the coils of his dragon, without hint 

of alarm or invective 
Looks up at the mists on the mountain. 

(Now what saint or archangel 

Stands winged on a dragon, 

Bearing golden scales and a broad bladed sword all 

golden ? 
Alas, my knowledge 
Of all the saints of the college. 
Of all these glimmering, olden 
Sacred and misty stories 
Of angels and saints and old glories . . . 
Is sadly defective.) 
The poor saint on the fountain . . . 

On top of his column 

Gazes up sad and solema. 

But is it towards the top of the mountain 

Where the spindrifty haze is 

That he gazes ? 

Or is it into the casement 

Where the girl sits sewing? 

There's no knowing. 

Hear it rain ! 

And from eight leaden pipes in the ball he stands on, 

That has eight leaden and copper bands on. 

There gurgle and drain 

Eight driblets of water down into the basin. 

And he stands on his dragon 

And the girl sits sewing 

High, very high in her casement 

And before her are many geraniums in a parket 

All growing and blowing 

37 



In box upon box 

From the gables right down to the basement 
With the frescoes and carvings and paint . . . 

The poor saint ! 

It rains and it rains, 

In the market there isn't an ox, 

And in all the emplacement 

For wagons there isn't a wagon. 

Not a stall for a grape or a raisin, 

Not a soul in the market 

Save the saint on his dragon 

With the rain dribbling down in the basin, 

And the maiden that sews in the casement. 

They are still and alone, 

Mutterseelens alone. 

And the rain dribbles down from his heels and his 

crown, 
From wet stone to wet stone. 
It's as grey as at dawn. 
And the owls, grey and fawn. 
Call from the little town hall 
With its arch in the wall. 
Where the fire-hooks are stored. 

From behind the flowers of her casement 

That's all gay with the carvings and paint. 

The maiden gives a great yawn, 

But the poor saint — 

No doubt he's as bored ! 

Stands still on his column 

Uplifting his sword 

With never the ease of a yawn 

From wet dawn to wet dawn . . . 



38 



TO ALL THE DEAD 

I 

A CHINESE Queen on a lacquered throne 
With a dragon as big as the side of a house, 
All golden, and silent and sitting alone 
In an empty house. 

With the shadows above and the shadows behind, 
And the Queen with a paper white, rice white face. 
As still as a partridge, as still as a mouse. 
With slanting eyes you would say were blind — 
In a dead white face. 

And what does she think, and what does she see, 
With her face as still as a frozen pool is. 
And her air as old as the oldest sea, 
Where the oldest ice of the frozen Pole is ? 

She should have been dead nine thousand year . . . 

But there come in three score and sixty coolies 

With a veil of lawn as large as a lake, 

And the veil blows here and shimmers there 

In the unseen winds of the shadowy house. 

And dragons flew in the shadowy air. 

And there were chrysanthemums everywhere. 

And butterflies and a coral snake 

All round the margin of the lake. 

For the Prince has come to court the Queen 

Still sitting on high on her lacquered throne 

With the golden dragon : and all the sheen 

And shimmer and shine of a thousand wantons 

In silken stuff's, with ivory lutes 

And slanting eyes and furred blue boots 

That moved in the light of a thousand Ian thorns . . 

It all dies down, and the Queen sits there. 
She should have been dead nine thousand year. 

39 



II 

Now it happened that in the course of to-day 
(The Queen was last night) in the rue de la Paix 
In a room that was old and darkish and musty, 
For most of the rooms are quaintly cranky 
In the rue de la Paix, 
For when it was new the Grande Arm6e 
Tramped all its legions down this way. 

But I sat there, and a friendly Yankee 

Was lecturing me on the nature of things 

(It's a way Americans have !) He was cranky. 

Just as much as his rooms and his chairs and his 

tables. 
But the window stood open and over the way 
I saw that the house with the modernest facings 
Had an old tiled roof with mansards and gables. 
It housed a jeweller, two modistes, 
A vendor of fans; and the topmost sign 
Announced in a golden double line 
A salon of Chinese chiropodists. 

And that is Paris from heel to crown 
Plate-glass in the street and jewels and lacings 
And cranky rooms on the upper floors 
With rusty locks and creaking doors 

But of what my American friend was saying 
I haven't a thought — there was too much noise 
Through the open windows — the motors braying, 
The clatter of hoofs in a steady stream, 
And a scream 

Unceasing from twenty paper boys, 
With twenty versions to take your choice, 
In styles courageous or gay or rococco, 
Of clamorous news about Morocco . . . 
40 



Ill 

And suddenly he said : " Sandusky ! " 

Now what was he talking of there in his musky, 

Worm-eaten rooms of the rue de la Paix ? 

— Of his youth of j ack rabbits and peanuts and snakes 

When all was silent about the Lakes. 

Now what is the name of them ? Lake Ladoga ? 

No, no, that's in Russia. It's Ticonderoga, 

Ontario, Champlin, each with their woods, 

And never a house for miles and miles 

And the boys in their boats floated on by the piles 

Of old wigwams where shreds of blankets dangled. 

And they caught their jack rabbits, lit bonfires and 

angled 
In shallows for catfish. That's it, in Sandusky ! 
The Bay of Sandusky. 

And then I remembered with grey, clear precision, 
And I saw — yes I saw — looking over the way 
Two Chinese chiropodists, villainous fellows. 
With faces of sulphur — and lemon — yellows, 
Gaze with that gaze that's half fanatic. 
Part atrocious and partly sweet, 
Each from a window of his own attic 
At a mannequin on my side of the street, 
And each grinned and girned inhisManchesterblue, 
And smirked with his eyes and his pig-tail too. 
And somehow they made me feel sick; but I lost them 
At the word " Sandusky." A landscape crossed them ; 
A scene no more nor less than a vision. 
All clear and grey in the rue de la Paix. 

It must have been seven years ago, 
I was out on a river whose name I've forgotten ; 
The Hudson perhaps or the Kotohotten. 
It doesn't much matter. Do you know the Hudson ? 

41 



A sort of a Moselle with New York duds on, 
There are crags and castles, a distance all grey, 
Rocks, forests and elbows. But castles of Jay 
And William H. Post and Mrs Poughkeepsie — 
Imagine a Moselle that's thoroughly tipsy, 
A nightmare of ninety American castles 
With English servants trained up like vassals, 
Of Hiram P. Ouese who's a fortune from pills for the 
liver. 

Anyhow, I've forgotten the name of the river. 

And the steamer steamed upwards between the hills 
And passed through the rapids they called the 

Narrows 
'Twixt the high grey banks where the firs grow 

jagged. 
And the castles ceased and the forest grew ragged. 
And the steamer belched forth sparks and stayed 
At a wooden village, then grunted and swayed 
Out to midstream and round a reach 
Where the river widened and swirled about. 
And we slowed in the current where black snags 

stuck out. 
And suddenly we saw a beach — 

A grey old beach and some old grey mounds 
That seemed to silence the steamer's sounds; 
So still and old and grey and ragged. 
For there they lay, the tumuli, barrows, 
The Indian graves 

IV 

And it wasn't so much the wampumed Braves, 
Eagle feathers, jade axes and totems and arrows 
That I thought about, for ten minutes later 
I was up and away from the Rue de la Paix 
42 



In a train for Treves. 

But the word " Sandusky " still hung in my brain 

As we went through greeny grey Lorraine 

In a jolting train, 

And then bargained for rooms with a German waiter. 

Or it wasn't even in great concern 

For the fate of " Sandusky Bay." — My friend 

Pictured it thronged with American villas, 

Dutch Porticos and Ionic pillars. 

So that no boy's ooat can land on the shores. 

For the high-bred owners of dry goods stores 

Forbid the practice. The villa lawns, 

Pitch-pine canoes with America's daughters 

In a sort of a daily Henley regatta 

And the bright parasols of Japanese paper 

Keep up a ceaseless, endless chatter. 

In the endless, ceaseless girl graduate story 

Where once there were silence, jack-rabbits and 

snakes. 
And o'er all the gay clatter there floats old Glory — 
The flag of the States, from a calico shop. 

But stop! 

I am not lamenting about the Lakes. 

For, as grey dawns roll on to grey dawns, 

Some things must surely come to an end. 

Even old silences over old waters 

Even here in Treves the Porta Nigra 

That isn't so much a gaunt black ruin. 

As a great black whole— a Roman gate-way. 

As high as a mountain, as black as a jail — 

Even here, even here, America's daughters. 

Long toothed old maids with a camera 

(For even they must know decay. 

And the passage of time, hasting, hasting away !) 

And the charm of the past grows meagre and meagrer. 

Though through it all the Porta Nigra 

43 



Keeps its black, hard and grim completeness, 
As if no fleet minutes with all their fleetness 
Could rub down its surface. 
But we've walled it in in a manner of speaking 
With electric trams that go sparking and streaking 
And filling the night with squeals and jangles 
As iron wheels grind on iron angles. . . . 

And nobody cares and nobody grieves 

And all the spires and towers of Treves 

Shade upwards into the sooty skies, 

And you dig up here a sword or a chalice, 

Some bones, some teeth and some golden bangles 

And several bricks from the Caesar's Palace. 

V 

And so I come back to this funny old town 

Where professors argue each other down 

And every one is in seven movements 

For every kind of Modern Improvements ; 

And there isn't a moment of real ease. 

But students come from the seven seas 

And we boast a professor of Neo-Chinese — 

A thing to astonish the upland heather — 

And more than the universities 

Of all High Germany put together 

Can show the like of. 

The upland heather 

It stretches for miles and miles and miles 

Wine-purple and brooding and ancient and blasted, 

An endless trackless, heather forest, 

And so, between whiles. 

When my mind's all reeling with Modern Movements 

And my eyes are weary, my head at its sorest 

And the best of beer has lost its zest, 

I go up there to get a rest 

And think of the dead 

44 



For it's nothing but dead and dead and dying 
Dead faiths, dead loves, lost friends and the flying, 
Fleet minutes that change and ruin our shows. 
And the dead leaves flitter and autumn goes, 
And the dead leaves flitter down thick to the ground, 
And pomps go down and queens go down 
And time flows on, and flows and flows. 

But don't mistake me, the leaves are wet 
And most of their copper splendour is rotten 
Like most of the dead — and still and forgotten, 
And I don't feel a spark of regret 
Not a spark 

I am sitting up here on a sort of a mound 
And the dull red sun has just done sinking 
And it's grown by this woodside fully dark 

And I'm just thinking 

And the valley lands and the forests and tillage 
Are wrapped in mist. There's the lights of a village. 
Of one — of three — of four ! — 
Four I can count from this high old mound . . . 
In Tilly's time you could count eighteen . . . 
You know of Tilly ? A general 
Who ravaged this land. There was Prince Eugene, 
And Marshal Saxe and Wallenstein, 
And God knows who . . . They are dead men all 
With tombs in cathedrals here and there. 
Just food for tourists. It's rather funny, 
They ravaged these cornfields and burned the ham- 
lets, 
They drove off the cattle and took the honey. 
And clocks and coin and chests and camlets : 
Reduced the numbers to four from eighteen ; 
You can see four glimmers of light thro' the gloom. 
But as for Marshal Wallenstein, 
No doubt he's somewhere in some old tomb 

45 



With a marble pillow beneath his head. 

He was shot. Or he wasn't. Anyhow he's dead ! 

And I'm sitting here on an old, smashed mound. 

And the wood-leaves are flittering down to the 
ground. 

And I'm sitting here and just thinking and wonder- 
ing, 

Clear thoughts and pictures, dull thoughts and blun- 
dering. 

It's all one. But I wonder ... I wonder . . . 

And under 

The earth of the barrow there's something moving 
Or no — not moving. Yes, shoving, shoving, 
Through the thick, dark earth — a fox or a mole. 
Phut! But it's dark ! I can't grasp the whole 
Of my argument — No. I'm not dropping to sleep ! 
(I can hear the leaves in the dark, cold wood ! 
That's a boar by his rustling !) ^^ From good to good, 
A ndgood to letter you say we go." 
(There's an owl overhead.) " You say that's so ?" 
My American friend of the rue de la Paix ? 
" Grow better and better from day to day." 
Well, well I had a friend that's not a friend to-day ; 
Well, well, I had a love who's resting in the clay 
Of a suburban cemetery. "Friend, 
My Yankee friendr (He's mighty heavy and tusky. 
Judged by his rustlings, that old boar in the wood) 
' ' From good to good ! 

Have you found a better bay than old Sandusky ? 
Or la better friend than the one that's left me ?" 
"No Argument? — WellTm not arguing 
I came out here to think" — 
Now what's that thing 

That's coursing o'er dead leaves. It's not a boar ! 
Some sort of woman ! A Geheimrath's cook 
Come out to meet her lover of the Ninth — 
46 



An Uhlan Regiment ! You know the Uhlans, 
Who charged at Mars La Tour; that's on their 
colours. 

But that little wretch. 

Whoever heard such kissing ! Sighs now ! Groans ! 
In the copper darkness of these wet, high forests. 
Well, well, that's no affair of mine to-night. 
I came out here though, yes, I'd an engagement 
With Major Hahn to give him his revenge — 
What was it ? At roulette ? But I'd a headache ! 
I came out here to think about that Queen ! 
The Chinese one — the one I saw in Paris. 
To-night's the thirtieth. . . the thirty-first. 
Why, yes, it's All Souls' Eve. That's why I'm morbid 
With thoughts of All the Dead. . . That Chinese Queen 
She never kissed her lover. But a queer, 
A queer, queer look came out on her rice white face ! 
I never knew such longing was in the world, 
Though not a feature stirred in her ! No kisses ! 
But there she wavered just behind his back 
With her slanting eyes. No moth about a flame. 
No seabird in the storm round a lighthouse glare 
Was e'er so lured to the ruin and wreck of love. 
And he knelt there with such a queer, queer face 
A queer, queer smile, and his uplifted hands 
He prayed as we pray to a Queen in dragon silk ; 
His hands rubbed palm on palm. And so she 

swayed 
And swayed just like a purple butterfly 
Above the open jaws of a coral snake. 

But she 

Should have been dead nine thousand years and 

more. 
Says our Chinese professor. For such acting 
Was proper to the days and time of TSiiang: 

47 



It's hopelessly demoded, dead and gone ! 
To-day we have — Chinese chiropodists 
Who smile like toads at Paris mannequins 
In the sacred name of Progress. Well, well, well ! 
I'm not regretting it — No vain regrets ! 
What's that 

Out of the loom of the Philosopher's wood 

Two figures brushing on the frozen grass. 

The Uhlan and the cook. So I cried out : 

" So late at night and not yet in the barracks ! 

Aren't you afraid of ghosts?" . . . "Oh ghosts! oh 

ghosts," 
I got my answer : " Friend, 
In our old home the air's so thick with ghosts 
You couldn't breathe if they were an objection ! " 
And so I said : " Well, well ! " to make them pass. . . . 

Just a glimmer of light there was across the grass 

And on my barrow mound. Upon his head 

The gleam of a helmet, and some sort of pelt 

About his shoulders and the loom of a spear. 

You never know these German regiments, 

The oddest uniforms they have ; and as for her 

Her hair was all across her shoulders and her face, 

Woodland embraces bring the hairpins out . . . 

" My friend," I said, " you'd better hurry home 

Or else you'll lose your situation ! " They 

Bickered in laughter and the man just said: 

" You're sitting on it ! " 

So I moved a little, 

Apologetically, just as it 

It was his table in a restaurant. 

So he said calmly, looking down at me : 

"They call these mounds the Hunnen Graber — 

Graves 
Of Huns — a modern, trifling folk ! 
48 



We've slept in them well on nine thousand years 

My wife and I. The dynasty TSiiang 

Then reigned in China — well, you know their ways 

Of courting. But your specialty just now 

I understand's not human life but death. 

I died with a wolf at my throat, this woman here 

With a sword in her stomach. Yes she fell on it 

To keep me company in that tumulus. 

Millions and millions of dead there lie round here 

In the manoeuvre grounds of the Seventeenth. 

Oh, yes, I'm up to date, why not, why not? 

When they've the Sappers here in garrison 

The silly chaps come digging in these mounds 

For practice; but they've not got down to us. 

The Seventeenth just scutter up and down 

At scaling practice and that's rather fun. 

There was a sergeant took a chap by the ear 

Last year and threw him bodily down the mound ; 

Then the recruit up with his bayonet 

And stuck him through the neck — no end of things 

We find for gossip in nine thousand years ! 

A Mongol people ? Yes of course we were 

I knew her very well that Queen who loved. 

With the rice white face — " Ta-why's " her proper 

name 
And that adultery bred heaps of trouble ! 
You've heard of Troy ? " Tra-hai's " the real name 
As Ta-why's Helen. Well, you know all that ? 
That trouble sent us here, being burnt out 
By the King called Ko-ha ! And we wandered on 
In just ten years of burning towns. This slave 
My wife came from Irkutsk way to the east 
Where the tundra is — You know the nightingales 
Come there in spring, and so they buried us 
Finger to finger as the ritual is. 
Not know the ritual ? Well, a mighty chief 
Is buried in a chamber like a room 

D 49 



Walled round with slabs of stone. But mighty lovers 

Lie on their backs at both arms' length, so far 

That just each little finger touches. Well 

That's how they buried us. A hundred years 

It took to get accustomed to the change. 

We lay just looking up — ^just as you might 

Upwards through quiet water at the stars, 

The roots of the grass, and other buryings, 

Lying remembering and touching fingers. 

Just still and quiet. Then I heard a whisper 

Lasting a hundred years or so ; "Your lips," 

It said, " Your lips ! your lips ! your lips ! " And then 

It might have been five more score years. I felt 

Her fingers crawling, crawling, up my wrist. 

And always the voice, call, calling; "Give your lips ! " 

It must have taken me a thousand years 

— -The Dead are patient — ^just to know that she 

Was calling for my lips. What an embrace ! 

My God what an embrace was ours through the 

Earth! 
My friend, if you should chance to meet Old Death 
That unprogressive tyrant, tell him this, 
He execrates my name — but tell him this — 
He calls me Radical ! Red Socialist, 
That sort of thing. But you just tell him this. 
The revolutionary leader of his realms 
Got his ambition from his dead girl's lips. 
Tell him in future he should spare hot lovers. 
Though that's too late ! We're working through the 

earth. 
By the score, by the million. Half his empire's lost. 
How can he fight us ? He has but one dart 
For every lover of the sons of Ahva! 
You call her Eve. This is a vulgar age". . . 
And so beside the woodland in the sheen 
And shimmer of the dewlight, crescent moon 

50 



And dew wet leaves I heard the cry " Your lips ! 
Your lips ! Your lips." It shook me where I sat, 
It shook me like a trembling, fearful reed. 
The call of the dead. A multitudinous 
And shadowy host glimmered and gleamed, 
Face to face, eye to eye, heads thrown back, and lips 
Drinking, drinking from lips, drinking from bosoms 
The coldness of the dew — and all a gleam 
Translucent, moonstruck as of moving glasses, 
Gleams on dead hair, gleams on the white dead 

shoulders 
Upon the backgrounds of black purple woods. . . 

There came great rustlings from the copper leaves 

And pushing outwards, shouldering, a boar 

With seven wives — a monstrous tusky brute. 

I rose and rubbed my eyes and all eight fled 

Tore down the mountain through the thick of the 

leaves 
Like a mighty wave of the sea that poured itself 
Farther and farther down the listening night. 
All round me was the clearing, and white mist 
Shrouded the frosty tussocks of old grass. 
And in the moonlight a wan fingerpost 
(I could not read the lower row of words.) 
Proclaimed: "Forbidden!" That's High Germany. 
Take up your glasses. " Prosit ! " to the past, 
To all the Dead! 



D2 51 



T 



RHYMING 

HE bells go chiming 

O'er Germany 

I sit here rhyming . . . 



If fun were funny, 
And love lived long, 
And always honey 
Were sweet on the tongue, 
Would life be better 
Or freedom free ? 

If each love-letter 
Spelt loyalty, 
If we didn't go timing 
The dance with a fetter ? 

If gold were true gold 
For alchemists 
— I sit here rhyming — 
And all were new gold 
In morning mists ? 
Would laughter measure 
The step of life 
If each took pleasure 
In each's wife ? 
If much were undone 
In what we see 
And we built up London 
In High Germany; 
Without much pity 
For crushed out grain 
We'd fling the city 
Across this plain — 
A phantom city 
52 



Like old Cokayne— 
Where old dead passions, 
Come true again 
And old time fashions 
Be new again, 
Where jests once witty 
Would start again, 
And long lost pity 
Take heart again. 

So I sit rhyming 

Offuntobe, 

And the bells all go chiming 

O'er High Germany. 



53 



AUTUMN EVENING 

THE cold light dies, the candles glow, 
The wind whirls down the bare allee 
Outside my gleaming window-panes 
The phantom populations go, 
Blown, amid leaves, above, below. 

Yet these are solid German folk 
Outside, beneath the thinning planes 
And the reflections that awoke 
At candle time upon my panes 
Are misty, unsubstantial gleams. 

Only outside, obscurity. 
The waning light, the cold blue beams 
And rafts of shadow trick the eye ; 
So that the frozen passers-by 
Look ghosts — and only real seems 
My candle lighted, lonely place. 
The gleaming windows and your face 
Looking in likeness from the wall 
Where the fantastic shadows fall 

Now the ghosts pass, the cold wind cries. 
The leaves sift downwards, the world dies, 
But in the shadows, lo ! your eyes. 



54 



IN THE TRAIN 

OUT of the window I see a dozen great stars, 
burning bright, 
Flying in silence, engrossed in the uttermost 
depths of the night, 
Star beyond star, growing clear, flying on as I pass 

through the night. 
It's many days since last I saw the stars 
Look through the night sky's bars, 
Like mists and veils of shimmer and shining gauze — 
So little time we have and so much cause 
To stay beneath the roof; so much to do ! 
The life we lead ! . . . Well, you 
Get to your bed at ten, and you, away 
I like my glass of wine to end the day. 

Now as the train ambles on, slowly and I watch alone 
Stars and black woods and the stream, dim in the 

light of the stars 
Winding away to the past beneath Castor and Pollux 

and Mars ; 
It seems as long since last I held your hand 
As since I saw the stars. 
And ah ! if we meet in this land. 
And ah ! if we meet oversea 
In the dark where the traffic of London races 
Or in these castled, woodland places — 
And then — wherever it be 
Shall not our thoughts go away into deeps 
Where the mind sleeps and the brain too sleeps. 
As when we take thought and we gaze 
Past all the bee swarms of stars 
Spread o'er the night and its bars, 
Past mists and veils and shimmer and shine and haze 
Into the deep and silent places, 

55 



The still, unfathomable spaces 

Where the brain sleeps and the mind too sleeps 

And all the deeps stretch out beyond the deeps 

And thought dies down before infinity ? ... 

So, in an utter satisfaction 

Beyond all thought and beyond all action 

In a blindness more blind than the starless places 

I shall stretch my face to where your face is. 

And over head, over land and sea 

Shall the white stars wheel in their reverie. 



56 



Mi 



THE EXILE 

Y father had many oxen 

Yet all are gone ; 
IMy father had many servants ; 
I sit alone. 

He followed the Southern women, 
He drank of the Southern wines, 
He fought in the Southern quarrels — 
My star declines. 

I will go to the Southern houses, I will sit 'mid the 

maids at hire ; 
I will bear their meat to the tables and carry wood 

to their fire ; 
Where the cheep of the rat and mouse is all night 

long will I lie, 
Awake in the byres and the stables. When the white 

moon looks from the sky, 
And over the Southern waters, and the wind blows 

warm from the South, 
With the bitter tears in my eyelids and the heavy 

sighs in my mouth, 
I shall hear through the gaping gables how the 

Southern night bird sings 
Of hirelings once Queen's daughters and slaves the 

seed of Kings. 



57 



MOODS ON THE MOSELLE 



SWEET! Sweet! Sweet!" sings the bird upon 
the bough. 
But though he may call for sweetness 
We have other things to witness, 
Not all cherry-pie and neatness, 
Now. 

" Mourn ! Mourn ! Mourn ! " cry the owls among the 

vines. 
But it's neither death nor fleetness 
That have any utter fitness, 
Not a final joy or sorrow, 
As we press out wines. 

"Change! Slow change!" ticks the church clock 

through the snow. 
And somehow 'twixt winter's dying 
And spring apple-blossoms flying 
And the summer hops a-tying . . . 
It's now haughty and now humble 
Change ! Slow change ! And rough-and-tumble. 
Down to-day and up to-morrow 
That our songs sing now. 



58 



CANZONE A LA SONATA 

(ToE.P.) 

WHAT do you find to boast of in our age, 
To boast of now, my friendly sonneteer. 
And not to blush for, later ? By what line 
Do you entrain from Mainz to Regions saner ? 
Count our achievements and uplift my heart; 
Blazon our fineness, Optimist, I toil 
Whilst you crow cocklike. But I cannot see 

What's left behind us for a heritage 
For our young children ? What but nameless fear ? 
What creeds have we to teach, legends to twine 
Saner than spun our dams ? Or what's there saner 
That we've devised to comfort those who part. 
One for some years to walk the stone-clad soil, 
One to his fathom-deep bed ? What coin have we 

For ransom when He grimly lays his siege 

Whose dart is sharpened for our final hurt ? 

I think we do not think ; we deem more fair 

Earth with un thought on death; we deem him gainer 

Whose brow unshadowed shows no wrinkled trail 

Of the remembrance of the countless slain ; 

Who sets the world to fitful melody — 

To fitful minstrelsy that's summer's liege 
When all the summer's sun-kissed fountains spurt 
Kisses of bubbling sound about our hair. 
I think we think that singing soul the gainer 
Who disremembers that spent youth must fail, 
That after autumn comes, few leaves remain 
And all the well-heads freeze, and melody 

59 



O'er frozen waters grows too hoarse with age 

To keep us from extremity of fear. 

When ag^d poets pen another line 

And ag^d maidens coif their locks in saner 

And staider snoods ; when winter of the heart 

Comes on and beds beneath the frozen soil 

Gape open — where's your grinning melody ? 



60 



SUSSMUND'S^ ADDRESS TO AN 
UNKNOWN GOD 

(Adapted from the High German) 



Mi 



Y God, they say I have no bitterness ! 
, Dear Unknown God, I gasp, I fade, I pine ! 
LNo bitterness ! Have firs no turpentine ? 
If so, it's true. 



Because I do not go wandering round Piccadilly 

Like an emasculated lily 

In a low-necked flannel shirt beneath the rain. 

(Is that what you'd do. 

Oh God Unknown, 

If you came down 

To Piccadilly 

And worried over London town ?) 

Wailing round Covent Garden's what I should do 

Declaiming to the beefy market porters 

Dramatic propaganda about social wrongs 

Denouncing Edward Morters 

Or saying that Mr William Pornett 

Is eleven kinds of literary hornet, 

Or that the death of Mr Arthur Mosse 

Would be no sort of loss 

But a distinct gain 

— That sort of silly literary songs 

About no oneyou know, 

And no one else could ever want to know. 

You owe 

(You've heard a thousand thousand dat qui cito^ s) 

Some sort of poisonous dew 

'Carl Eugen Freiherr von Siissmund, b. 1872, d. 1910. This 
is, of course, a quite free adaptation. 

61 



Shed on the flowers where these high-horned mos- 
quitoes 
Dance in a busy crew. 

But they will go on setting up their schools, 
Making their little rules, 
Finding selected ana. 
Collected in Montana: 
Connected with Commedie Divine 
Or maidens with names like Deiridrine . . . 
Dear Lord, you know the stuff 
You must have heard enough. 

Find me a barrel into which to creep 
Dear Unknown God, and get dead drunk and sleep. 
But listen, this is for your ear alone 
(God : where are you ? Let me come close and whisper 
What no one knows — I'm really deadly tired, 
I cannot write a line, my hands are stiff. 
Writing's a rotten job, my head goes round : 
You have afflicted me with whip-cord nerves. 
That hammering fool drives me distracted . . . God ! 
Strike him with colic, send him screaming home. 
Strike, Dash and Dash and Dash with eye com- 
plaints ; 
That beast who choked his dog with a tight collar 
(He gave his child the lead to hold) last night ; 
It made me sick; God strike him with the pip. 
And send down one dark night and no one near 
And one white throat within my fingers' grip !) 

Dear God, you bade me be a gentleman, 

And well you know I've been it. But their rot . . . 

Sometimes it makes me angry. This last season 

I've listened smiling to new Celtic bards. 

To Anti-Vivisectionists and Friends of Peace, 

To Neo-Psychics, Platonists and Poets 

Who saved the Universe by chopping logs 

In your own image 

62 



I've smiled at Whigs intoning Whiggery 
To keep the Labour Market down ; at Tories 
Sickening for office. I have surely been 
Plumb centre in the Movement. O my God 

Is this a man's work. God I've backed up 's 

With proper letters in the Daily Press : 

I've smiled at Dowagers and Nonconformists ; 

At wriggling dancers ; forty pianists ; 

Jew politicians ; Front Rank Statesmen's 's 

Yankee conductors of chaste magazines . . . 
God, fill my purse and let me go away. 

But God, dear God ! I'll never get away 

I know the you are ! 

That's off my chest. You'll never let me go. 
I know I'll never drink myself dead drunk 
Because to-morrow I shall have appointments 
— You'll make them for me — with a Jail Reform 
And Pure Milk Rotter — such a pleasant man ! 
One garden city builder, seven peers 
Concerned with army remounts, and a girl 
Mad to take dancing lessons ! Such my morrow ! 

It's not so much I ask Great God of mine 

(Fill up my little purse and let me go !) 

These earnest, cold-in-the-heart and practised 

preachers 
Have worked their will on me for long enough. 
Some boring me to tears while I sat patient ; 
Some picked my purse and bit me in the back 
The while I smiled as you have taught me to, 
(Fill up my little purse and let me go !) 
It's not my job to go denouncing jobs 
You did not build me for it. Not my job ! 
Whilst they are on the make, snatching their bits 
Beneath the wheels of ninety-nine reforms. 

(Note.— I have been unable to follow the Freiherr at any interval 
at all on this page without leaving several words blank. F.M.H.) 

63 



But this is truth; 

There's not one trick they've not brought off 

on me, 
I guess they think I haven't noticed it 
For I've no bitterness . . . 
They've lied about me to my mistresses, 
Stolen my brandy, plagiarized my books, 
Lived on me month by month, broken agreements, 
Perjured themselves in courts, and sworn false 

oaths 
With all the skill of Protestant British tradesmen 
Plundering a Papist and a foreigner 

With God on their lips 

But all that's private. . . 

Oh, you sleeping God, 
I hope you sit amongst the coloured tents 
Of any other rotten age than this — 
With great pavilions tinctured all with silks. 
Where emerald lawns go stretching into space. 
With mailed horses, simple drunken knights. 
Punctilious heralds and high-breasted ladies 
Beauteous beyond belief and not one better 
Than you would have her be — in such a heaven 
Where there's no feeling of the moral pulse, 
I think I'd find some peace — with treachery 
Of the sword and dagger kind to keep it sweet 
— Adultery, foul murder, pleasant things, 
A touch of incest, theft, but no Reformers. 



Dear God of mine 

Who've tortured me in many pleasant ways 

I hope you've had some fun. And thank you, God! 

No doubt you'll keep your bargain in the end. 

No doubt I'll get my twopenny-halfpenny pay 

At the back door of some bright hued pavilion 

From a whore of Heaven 

64 



But when it comes to " have no bitterness "... 
(For bitter we read " earnest ") I've no stomach 
For such impertinence ; its subtlety 
(You know it, God, but let me get it down) 
Is too ingenious. It implies just this: 



" Here is a man when times are out of joint 
Who will not be enraged at Edward Morter, 
Pornett or Mosse; who will not to the woes 
Of a grey underworld lend passionate ears 
Nor tear his hair to tatters in the cause 
Of garden suburbs or of guinea pigs 
Injected with bacilli . . . Such a man 
(So say the friends that I have listened to 
Whole wasted, aching desolate afternoons !) 
Is morally castrated ; pass him by ; 
Give him no management in this great world. 
No share in fruity Progress or the wrongs 
Of market porters, tram conductors, pimps, 
Marriage-reforming divorcees, Whig statesmen 
Or serious Drama." 



Did I, dear God, ever attempt to shine 
As such a friend of Progress ? God, did I 
Ever ambitiously raise up my voice 
To outshout these eminent preachers ? 
Suck up importance from a pauper's wrongs 
I never did! 

But these mosquitoes must make precious sure 
I do not take a hand in their achievements 
Therefore they say, I have no bitterness 
Being a eunuch amongst these proper men, 
Who stand foursquare 'gainst evil (that's their 
phrase !) 

E 65 



God, you've been hard on me ; I'm plagued with 

boils, 
Little mosquito-stings, warts, poverty ! 
Yes, very hard. But when all's catalogued 
You've been a gentleman in all your fun. 
No doubt you'll keep your bargain. Unknown God. 
This surely you will never do to me — 
Say I'm not bitter. That you'll never do. 
'Twould be to outpass the bounds of the Divine 
And turn Reformer. 



66 



THE FEATHER 

I WONDER dost thou sleep at night, 
False friend and falser enemy ! 
Iwonderif thyhoursare long and dragoutwearily! 
We've passed days and nights together 
In our time . . . But that white feather 
That the wind's blown past the roof ridge 
// IS gone. . . . So I from thee 1 

Aye, chase it o'er the courtyard stones. 
Past friend of mine, my enemy ! 
Chase on beneath the chestnut boughs and out to- 
ward the sea, 
If the fitful wind should fail it. 
Thou may'st catch it, and may'st trail it 
In midden's mud and garbage . . . 
A s thou hast my thoughts of thee. 

So I wonder dost thou sleep at night ? 

Once friend of mine, my enemy ? 

Or whether dost thou toss and turn to plan new 

treachery? 
As the feather thou hast trodden 
So my thoughts of thee are sodden 

When I think Yes, half forgotten, 

A faint taste of something rotten 

Comes at times, like worm-struck wood ash 

Comes at times, the thought of thee. 

But I would not have thy night thoughts 
As the slow clock beats to dayward ! 
I'll be sleeping with my eyes shut, 
Dreaming deep, or dreaming wayward. 
And I hear thee turn and mutter 
As thy dawn- ward candles gutter — 
For thou fear'st the dark . . . Hark! "Judas! " 
Says the dawn wind from the sea. 
Round the house it whispers "Judas ! " 
Friend of mine, my enemy. 

E2 67 



II 
SONGS FROM LONDON 

The following poems appeared in the volume of 
the above name published by Mr Elkin Mathews in 
1910. 



VIEWS 



BEING in Rome I wonder will you go 
Up to the Hill. But I forget the name 
Aventine ? Pincio ? No : I do not know. 
I was there yesterday and watched. You came. 

The seven Pillars of the Forum stand 

High, stained and pale 'neath the Italian heavens, 

Their capitals linked up form half a square ; 

A grove of silver poplars spears the sky. 

You came. Do you remember ? Yes, you came, 

But yesterday. Your dress just brushed the herbs 

That nearly hide the broken marble lion 

And I was watching you against the sky. 

Such light ! Such air ! Such prism hues ! and Rome 

So far below; I hardly knew the place. 

The domed St Peter's ; mass of the Capitol ; 

The arch of Trajan and St Angelo. . . . 

Tiny and grey and level ; tremulous 

Beneath a haze amidst a sea of plains 

But I forget the name, who never looked 
On any Rome but this of unnamed hills. 

II 

Tho' you're in Rome you will not go, my You, 
Up to that Hill but I forget the name, 

Aventine ? Pincio ? No, I never knew 

I was there yesterday. You never came. 

I have that Rome ; and you, you have a Me, 
You have a Rome and I, I have my You ; 
My Rome is not your Rome : my you, not you 

. . . For, if man knew woman 

7» 



I should have plumbed your heart; if woman, man 

Your me should be true I If in your day — 

You who have mingled with my soul in dreams, 
You who have given my life an aim and purpose, 
A heart, an imaged form — if in your dreams 
You have imagined unfamiliar cities 
And me among them, I shall never stand 
Beneath your pillars or your poplar groves, . . . 
Images, simulacra, towns of dreams 
That never march upon each other's borders 
And bring no comfort to each other's hearts ! 



Ill 

Nobly accompanied am I — Since you. 

You — simulacrum, image, dream of dreams, 

Amidst these images and simulacra 

Of shadowy house fronts and these dim, thronged 

streets 
Are my companion ! 

Where the pavements gleam 
I have you alway with me: and grey dawns 
In the far skies bring you more near — more near 
Than City sounds can interpenetrate. 
All vapours form a background for your face 
In this unreal town of real things, 
And my you stands beside me and makes glad 
All my imagined cities and thence walks 
Beside me towards yet unimagined hills 

Being we two, full surely we shall go 

Up to that Hill some synonym for Home. 

Avalon ? Grave ? or Heaven ? I do not know 

But one day or to-day, the day may come. 
When I may be your I, your Rome my Rome. 
72 



FINCHLEY ROAD 

AS we come up at Baker Street 
/\ Where tubes and trains and 'buses meet 
J- ». There's a touch of fog and a touch of sleet ; 
And we go on up Hampstead way 
Towards the closing in of day . . . 

You should be a queen or a duchess rather, 
Reigning in place of a warlike father 
In peaceful times o'er a tiny town 
Where all the roads wind up and down 
From your little palace — a small, old place 
Where every soul should know your face 
And bless your coming. That's what I mean, 
A small grand-duchess, no distant queen, 
Lost in a great land, sitting alone 
In a marble palace upon a throne. 

And you'd say to your shipmen : " Now take your ease, 
To-morrow is time enough for the seas." 
And you'd set your bondmen a milder rule 
And let the children loose from the school. 
No wrongs to right and no sores to fester, 
In your small, great hall 'neath a firelit dais. 
You'd sit, with me at your feet, your jester. 
Stroking your shoes where the seed pearls glisten 
And talking my fancies. And you as your way is. 
Would sometimes heed and at times not listen. 
But sit at your sewing and look at the brands 
And sometimes reach me one of your hands. 
Or bid me write you a little ode, 
Part quaint, part sad, part serious . . . 

But here we are in the Finchley Road 
With a drizzling rain and a skidding 'bus 
And the twilight settling down on us. 

73 



THE THREE-TEN 

WHEN in the prime and May Day time dead 
lovers went a- walking, 
How bright the grass in lads' eyes was, how 

easy poet's talking ! 
Here were green hills and daffodils, and copses to 

contain them : 
Daisies for floors did front their doors agog for maids 

to chain them. 
So when the ray of rising day did pierce the eastern 

heaven 
Maids did arise to make the skies seem brighter far 

by seven. 
Now here's a street where 'bus routes meet, and 'twixt 

the wheels and paving 
Standeth a lout that doth hold out flowers not worth 

the having. 
But see, but see ! The clock marks three above theKilburn 

Station, 
Those maids, thank God! are 'neath the sod and all their 

generation. 

What she shall wear who'll soon appear, it is not hood 

nor wimple, 
But by the powers there are no flowers so stately or so 

simple, 
And paper shops and full 'bus tops confront the sun 

so brightly. 
That, come three-ten, no lovers then had hearts that 

beat so lightly 
As ours, or loved more truly. 
Or found green shades or flowered glades to fit their 

loves more duly. 
And see, and see ! ' Tts ten fast three above the Kilburn 

Station, 
Those maids, thank God! are 'neath the sod and all their 

generation. 
74 



FOUR IN THE MORNING COURAGE 

THE birds this morning wakened me so early it 
was hardly day: 
Ten sparrows in the lilac tree, a blackbird in the 

may, 
A starling somewhere in the mews, a songthrush on 

a broken hat 
Down in the yard the grocers use, all cried : " Beware ; 

Beware! The Cat!" 
I've never had the heart to rhyme, this year: I've 

always wakened sad 
And late, if might be, so the time would be more short 

— but I was glad 
With a mad gladness in to-day that is the longest day 

in June. 
{That blackbird' s nesting in the may.) For only yester- 
day at noon 
In the long grass of Holland Park, I think — I think 

— I heard a lark . . . 
I heard your voice : I saw your face once more . . . 

( Upon that packing case 
The starling waked me ere the day aping the thrush's 

sober tune). 



75 



MODERN LOVE 



KNEE-DEEP among the buttercups, the sun 
Gilding the scutcheons and the gilded mail, 
Gilding the crowned helm and leopard crest, 
Dear, see they pant and strike at your desire. 

And one goes down among the emerald grass, 
And one stands over him his dagger poised. 
His visor raised, his blood-shot eyes a-travel 
Over the steel that lies between his feet. 
Crushing the buttercups . . . and so the point goes in 
Between the gorget and the habergeon . . . 
And blood floods out upon the buttercups. 
Gules, or and vert beneath an azure sky. 

And now the victor strides knee-deep in grass, 
His surcoat brushing down the flower-heads 
To where above the hedge a hennin peeps 
Wide, white and waving like a wild swan's wings, 
And a green dress, a mantlet all of vair 

And such dear eyes Dear, you've the dearest eyes 

In all the world — the most compassionate eyes. 



76 



II 

... In your garden, here 

The light streams down between the silvered leaves, 

And we sit still and whisper . . . But our fight ! 

The gross Black Prince among the buttercups 

Could grin and girn and pant and sweive and smite 

And, in ten minutes it was win or lose : 

A coffin board or ale, a coarse caress 

Or just an end of it for Life or Death . . . 

Is that a footfall on the gravel path ? 

Are your stretched nerves on edge ? And do you see ? 

There, white and black, the other couple go. 

And if some others knew ! Oh, buttercups. 

And blood upon the grass beneath the sun . . . 

Give me your garden where the street lamp shines 

Between the leaves : your garden seat, your hand. 

Just touching mine — and all the long, long fight 

That lies before us, you of the dear eyes. 



77 



SPRING ON THE WOODLAND PATH 

SO long a winter such an Arctic night ! 
I had forgot that ever spring was bright : 
But hark ! The blackbird's voice like a clear 
flame! 

So long a winter, such an age of chill, 
Made me forget this silver birch clad hill. 
But see, the newborn sunbeams put to shame 
Our long dead winter : bracken fronds like flame. 
Pierce the new morning's saffron-watered light. 

So long, so long the winter in our hearts. 
We had forgotten that old grief departs 
And had forgotten that our hands could meet. 

So long, so long : Remember our last May 
When there was sunshine still and every day 
New swallows skimmed low down along the street. 
Ay, spring shall come, but shall we ever meet 
With the old hearts in this forgotten way ? 



78 



CONSIDER 

NOW green comes springing o'er the heath, 
And each small bird with lifted breath 
Cries, "Brother, consider the joy there is in 
living!" 
" Consider ! consider ! " the jolly throstle saith. 

The golden gorse, the wild thyme, frail 

And sweet, the butter cowslip pale, 

Cry "Sisters, consider the peace that comes with 

giving! 
And render, and render your sweet and scented 

breath!" 

Now men, come walking o'er the heath 
To mark this pretty world beneath. 
Bethink them: "Consider what j oy might lie in living. 
None striving, constraining none, and thinking not 
on Death." 



79 



CLUB NIGHT 



THERE was an old man had a broken hat, 
He had a crooked leg, an old tame cat, 
An old lame horse that cropped along the hedge. 
And an old song that set your teeth on edge, 
With words like : 

" Club night's come ; it's time the dance begins. 
Up go the lamps, we've all got nimble shins. 
One night a year man and wife may dance at ease 
And we'll dance all the village to its knees." 

This silly old man had a broken heart ; 
He went a-peddling onions from his cart. 
Once years ago, when Club night fell in June, 
His new- wed wife went off with a dragoon, 
Whilst he sang : 

" Club night's come ; it's time the dance begins. 
Up go the lamps, we've all got nimble shins. 
One night a year man and wife may dance at ease 
And we'll dance all the village to its knees." 



80 



TO CHRISTINA AND KATHARINE 
AT CHRISTMAS 

NOW Christmas is a porter' s-rest whereon to set his 
load; 
And Christmas was a blessed bed for One who 
loved her God. 
And Christmas is a chiming bell to ships upon the sea 
That decks the shrouds and lights the ports and tolls 
for Memory — 
But Christmas is a meeting-place 
For you and me. 

God send your hearts may never grow so old 

As to forget that this day Mary's lips 

First touched Her young Child'sbrow: andmayyour 

eyes 
Not ever grow too cold to recognize 
How to poor men and women these days bear 
A gift of rest. Pray that the gentle air 

Give relaxation to a myriad ships 

And, oh my little ones, may no December 
See Christmas come and me no longer dear 
To your dear hearts and voices. This remember : 

How Christmas is the pardon day when Justice drops its 
load; 
And is the lily-blossomed field where Jesuswalkswith 
God. 
Now Saints set foot upon the waves to still the yeasty sea. 
And other Saints to hurdled sheep give comfort 
patiently. 
Now all good men beside their hearths call upon 
Memory: 
Now, now comes in the meeting-time 
For you and me ! 

F 8i 



THE DREAM HUNT 



M 



Y Lady rides a-hunting 
Upon a dapple grey : 
Six trumpeters they ride behind, 
Six prickers clear the way. 



And when she climbs the hillsides 
The Hunt cries : " Ho ! la ! Lo ! " 

And when she trails along the dales 
The merry horns do blow. 

And so in summer weather, 

Before the heat of day, 
My darling takes all eyes and breaks 

My heart and makes away. 



82 



THE OLD LAMENT 



WHAT tnakeik lads so cruel be ? 
A vitd the spume and wrack. 
They pass the door and put to sea, 
And never more come back. 

The grey, salt wind winds down the wave, 

The galleon flouts the bay, 
And cobles and coggers are raising their sails : 

God keep 'ee down on the quay ! 
With a hoist at thy tackles, a haul at thy blocks, 

And a hail to a hastening crew. 
He'll take 'ee Who gave 'ee thy goldilocks 

Ere I pardon thine eyes o' blue. 

Not once to ha' looked within my hood ! 

Nor guessed I quailed on the strand 
Wi' thee in the boats ! Thro' my pent-up door 

I ha' kissed to 'ee my hand. 
They'll rive thy keel wi' their cannon shocks, 

And sink 'ee and all thy crew ; 
And they'll leave to the raven and cliff-homed fox 

Thy kindly eyes o' blue. 

Why need 'ee pass my open door 

Each breaking o' the day ? 
What made 'ee take that selfsame path 

And never another way ? 
I'll find 'ee stretched on the grinding rocks 

With a Frenchman's shot shot through, 
And the mermaid's weed from thy goldilocks 

Across thine eyes o' blue. 

What made 'ee lad, so cruel be ? 

A mid the spume and wrack, 
To pass the door and put to sea 

Andnever once look back ! 

F2 83 



MAURESQUE 

(ToV.M.) 

TO horse ! To horse ! the veil of night sinks softly 
down. 
The hills are violet, the desert brown, 
And thou asleep upon the silken pillows 
Within the small white town. 

We ride ! We ride ! and o'er the sand in billows 
The crescent moon looks softly down. 



84 



IN THE STONE JUG 

(Tom of Hounslow Heath sings on the night before his execution) 

OLD days are gone : 
Lo ! I go to find better ; 
Bright suns once shone. 
Shall they never shine again ? 
Here's a queer inn for to-night, but the next one 
I will contrive shall be freed from what's vext one 
In this, and to-morrow, for all that's perplext one, 
I shall arise with a head firee of pain. 

Here's luck, old friends. 

Though to-night's proved the finish 

And this tap now ends. 

Shall we never brew again ? 
Aye, by my faith and the faith I have in you, 
You who have kist and have laughed at the sin. You 
Witch that I gambled and squandered to win, you 
Too shall come in with me out of the rain. 



85 



HOW STRANGE A THING 

HOW strange a thing to think upon : 
Whilst we sit here with pipes and wine 
This world of ours goes roving on 
Where stars and planets shine. 
A nd round and round and round and round 
This brave old ball, still out and in — 
Whilstwe sit still on solid ground — 
Doth spin and spin and spin. 

And, whilst we're glad with pipes and wine, 

We travel leagues and leagues of space : 

Our arbour's trellised with the vine, 

Our host's a jocund face. 

Yet on and 071 and on 

This brave old ball spins in and out: 

Why, here's a thing to think upon 

A nd make a song about. 

Ho, landlord, bring new wine along 
And fill us each another cup. 
We're minded to give out a song. 
My journey, mates; stand up. 
For round and round and round and round 
This noble ball doth spin and spin, 
And 'twixt the firmament and ground 
Doth bear tcs and our sin. 



86 



Ill 
FROM INLAND 

The following poems appeared in the volume of 
the above name published by Mr Alston Rivers in 
1907. 



FROM INLAND 

I DREAMED that you and I were young 
Once more, and by our old grey sea 
Raced in the wind ; but matins, sung 
High on these vineyards, wakened me : 
I lay half-roused and seemed to hold 
Once more, beside our old grey sea. 
Your hand. I saw the primrose gold 
Your hair had then, and seemed to see 
Your eyes, so childlike and so wise, 
Look down on me. 

By the last fire we ever lit 

You knelt, and bending down your head, 

— If you could compass it, you said, 

Not ever would you live again 

Your vanished life ; never again 

Pass through those shadowy vales of pain. 

"And now I'm old and here I sit ! " 

You said, and held your hands apart 

To those old flames we've left behind 

As far — as far as some dead wind 

No doubt I fetched fi-om near my heart 
Brave platitudes — for you were there ; 
The firelight lit your brooding face. 
Shadowed your golden, glowing hair : 
I could be brave for the short space 
I had you by my chair. . . . 
As thus: " Since with the ebb of Youth 
Rises the flood of passionless 
And calm enjoyment, rises Truth 
And fades the painful earnestness 
Of all young thought, We two," I said, 
" Have still the best to come." But you 
Bowed down your brooding, silent head, 

89 



Patient and sad and still. . . . 

This view, 
Steep vineyards rising parched and brown, 
This weary stream, this cobbled town, 
White convents on each hill-top — Dear ! 
What would I give to climb our down, 
Where the wind hisses in each stalk 
And, from the high brown crest to see, 
Beyond the ancient, sea-grey town, 
The sky-line of our foam -flecked sea ; 
And, looking out to sea, to hear. 
Ah ! Dear, once more your pleasant talk ; 
And to go home as twilight falls 
Along the old sea-walls ! 
The best to come ! The best ! The best ! 
One says the wildest things at times. 
Merely for comfort. But — The best! 
Ah ! well, at night, when the moon climbs 
High o'er these misty inland capes. 
And hears the river lisping rhymes, 
And sees the roe-deer nibbling grapes 
Beneath the evanescent gleams 
Of shaken dewdrops, shall come dreams, 
Gliding amid the mists beneath : 
A dream, maybe, of you and me. 
Young once again by our old sea. 
But, ah ! we two must travel wide 
And far and far ere we shall find 
That recollected, ancient tide 
By which we walked, or that old wind 
That fled so bravely to its death. 



90 



THE PORTRAIT 

SHE sits upon a tombstone in the shade; 
One flake of sunlight, falling thro' the veils 
Of quivering poplars, lights upon her hair. 
Shot golden, and across her candid brow. 
Thus in the pleasant gloom she holds the eye, 
Being life amid piled up remembrances 
Of the tranquil dead. 

One hand, dropped lightly down. 
Rests on the words of a forgotten name : 
Therefore the past makes glad to stay her up. 
Closed in, walled off: here's an oblivious place, 
Deep, planted in with trees, unvisited : 
A still backwater in the tide of life. 
Life flows all round : sounds from surrounding streets. 
Laughter of unseen children, roll of wheels. 
Cries of all vendors. — So she sits and waits. 
And she rejoices us who pass her by, 
And she rejoices those who here lie still. 
And she makes glad the little wandering airs. 
And doth make glad the shaken beams of light 
That fall upon her forehead : all the world 
Moves round her, sitting on forgotten tombs 
And lighting in to-morrow. She is Life : 
That makes us keep on moving, taking roads, 
Hauling great burdens up the unending hills, 
Pondering senseless problems, setting sail 
For undiscovered anchorages. Here 
She waits, she waits, sequestered among tombs. 
The sunlight on her hair. She waits, she waits : 
The secret music, the resolving note 
That sets in tune all this discordant world 
And solves the riddles of the Universe. 



91 



SONG 



OH ! purer than the day new-born, 
More candid than the pearled morn, 
Come soon and set the day in tune 
All through the sun-bathed afternoon ; 
Come soon ! 

Oh ! sweeter than the roses be, 
Subtler than balm or rosemary. 
Come now, and 'neath this orchard bough 
Hark to the tranquil sea-wind's sough : 
Come now ! 

More rhythmic when you step than tunes 
Wafted o'er waves in summer moons, 
Bide here, and in my longing ear 
Murmur the words I crave to hear; 
Bide here ! 

Here, in the shadowy sacred place, 
Close up your eyes, hide, hide your face. 
And, in the windless silence, rest. 
Now the cool night falls; dear and blest. 
Now sleep, a dim and dreamless sleep, 
Whilst I watch over you and keep 
Your soul from fears. Now sleep ! 

Oh 1 purer than the morning light, 
A nd more beloved than dead of night. 
Come soon to set the world in tune 
From midnight till the dial marks noon : 
From dawn till the world'' s end. Come soon ! 
Come soon ! 



92 



THE UNWRITTEN SONG 

NOW where's a song for our small dear, 
With her quaint voice and her quick ear, 
To sing — for gnats and bats to hear — 
At twilight in her bed ? 
A song of tiny elfin things 
With shiny, silky, silvery wings. 
Footing it in fairy rings. 
And kissing overhead. 

A song of starry glow-worms' lights 
In the long grass of shadowy nights. 
And flitting showers of firefly flights. 

Where summer woods hang deep ; 
Of hovering, noiseless owls that find 
Their way at dark ; and of a kind 
And drowsy, drowsy ocean wind 

That puts the sea to sleep. 

Buiwhere's the song for our small dear, 
Withher quaint voice and her quick ear. 
To sing— for dreamland things to hear — 
And hush herself to sleep ? 



93 



ASUABIAN LEGEND 

GOD made all things, 
And, seeing they were good, 
He set a limit to the springs. 
And circumscribed the flood, 
Stayed the aspiring mountain ranges. 
And said : " Henceforth shall be no changes "; 
On all the beasts he set that ban. 
And drew his line 'twixt woman and 'twixt man. 

God, leaning down 
Over the world beneath. 
Surveyed his changeless work : 

No creature drew its breath. 
No cloud approached with rain unto the hills. 
No waves white on the ocean, and no breeze; 
Still lay the cattle in the meads ; the rills 
Hung in the tufts of moss ; the trees 
Seemed carven out of metal ; manhood stood 
Drooping his silent head by womanhood. 
Nor voice of beasts nor any song of bird 
Nor sound of wind were from the woodlands heard. 

God, leaning down 
Over the world beneath. 
Knitted his brows to a frown 
And fashioned Death : 

The clouds faded around the mountain heads, 
The rills and streams sank in their stony beds. 
The ocean shivered and lay still and dead. 
And man fled and the beasts fled 
Into the crevices of mountains round; 
The grass withered on the sod; 
Beetles and lizards faded into the ground : 
And God [frowned. 

Looked on his last-made creature. Death, and 
94 



He paced in thought awhile 

His darkened and resounding courts above : 

They brightened at his smile : 

He had imagined Love 

( Oh ! help us ere we die : we die too soon ; 

We, zaho are born at dawn, have hut one noon. 

And fade e' ernightf all). . . . 

Then the Lord made Love. 
And, looking down to Earth, he saw 
The green flame out across each shaw, 
The worms came creeping o'er the lawns, 
Sweet showers in the pleasant dawns. 
The lapwings crying in the fens. 
The young lambs leaping from their pens, 
The waves run tracing lines of white 
On the cerulean ocean. But at night 
Man slept with woman in his arms. 

Then thunder shook 
At the awful irown of God. His way he took 
Over the trembling hills to their embowered nook. 

But standing there above those sleeping things 
God was aware of one whose insubstantial wings 
A-quiver formed a penthouse o'er the place : 
Therefore God stayed his hand, and sighed 
To see how lip matched lip, side mated side, 
And the remembered joy on each sealed face : 
Therefore God stayed his hand and smiled. 
Shook his tremendous head and went his way ; 
Love being his best begotten child, 
And having over Death and Sin God's sway. 

{Oh ! help us ere we die : we die too soon ; 
We, who are horn at dawn, have hut one noon. 
And fade e'er nightfall. Oh ! Eternal One, 
Help us to know short joy whose course is run 
So soon : so soon.) 

95 



SEA JEALOUSY 

CAST not your looks upon the wan grey sea, 
Waste not your voice upon the wind ; 
Let not your footsteps sink upon the sand, 
Hold no sea-treasure in your hand, 
And let no sea-shell in your ear 
Nor any sea-thought in your mind 
Murmur a mystery. 

Turn your soft eyes upon mine eyes that long; 

Let your sweet lips on mine be sealed; 

Fold soft sweet hands between your sweet soft 

breasts, 
And, as a weary sea-mew rests 
Upon the sea 
Utterly — utterly yield 
Your being up to me. 

And all around, grey seascape and the sound 
Of droned sea song. 



96 



ENOUGH 

"Enough for you," said he, "that ye from afar have viewed 
this goodly thing that all that many may never espy." — Ho-w They 
Quested, etc. 

LONG we'd sought for Avalon, 
Avalon the rest place ; 
^Long, long we'd laboured 
The oars — yea, for years. 

Late, late one eventide 
Saw we o'er still waters 
Turrets rise and roof-frets 
Golden in a glory, 
Heard for a heart-beat 
Women choirs and harpings 
Waft down the wave-ways. 

Saw we long-sought Avalon 
Sink thro' still waters : 
Long, long we'd laboured 
The oars — yea, and yearned. 



97 



TANDARADEI 

(WALTER VON DER VOGELWEIDE) 

UNDER the lindens on the heather, 
There was our double resting-place, 
Side by side and close together 
Garnered blossoms, crushed, and grass 
Nigh a shaw in such a vale : 
Tandaradei, 
Sweetly sang the nightingale. 

I came a-walking through the grasses; 

Lo ! my dear was come before. 

Ah ! what befell then — listen, listen, lasses — 

Makes me glad for evermore. 

Kisses ? — thousands in good sooth : 

Tandaradei, 

See how red they've left my mouth. 

There had he made ready — featly, fairly — 

All of fiow'ring herbs a yielding bed, 

And that place in secret still smiles rarely. 

If by chance your foot that path should tread. 

You might see the roses pressed, 

Tandaradei, 

Where e'enow my head did rest. 

How he lay beside me, did a soul discover 

(Now may God forfend such shame from me) : 

Not a soul shall know it save my lover; 

Not a soul could see save I and he, 

And a certain small brown bird : 

Tandaradei, 

Trust him not to breathe a word. 



98 



LULLABY 

WE'VE wandered all about the upland fallows, 
We've watched the rabbits at their play; 
But now, good-night, good-bye to soaring 
swallows, 
Now good-night, good-bye, dear day. 

Poppy heads are closing fast, pigeons circle home at 

last; 
Sleep, Liebchen, sleep, the bats are calling. 
Pansies never miss the light, but sweet babes must 

sleep at night ; 
Sleep, Liebchen, sleep, the dew is falling. 

Even the wind among the quiet willows 
Rests, and the sea is silent too. 
See soft white linen, cool, such cool white pillows. 
Wait in the darkling room for you. 

All the little lambs are still now the moon peeps down 

the hill; 
Sleep, Liebchen, sleep, the owls are hooting. 
Ships have hung their lanthorns out, little mice dare 

creep about; 
Sleep, Liebchen, sleep, the stars are shooting. 



G2 99 



IV 

THE FACE OF THE NIGHT 

The following poems appeared in the volume 
called as above and published by Mr Macqueen in 
1904. 



I 



A SEQUENCE 



You make me think of lavender, 
And that is why I love you so : 
Your sloping shoulders, heavy hair, 
And long swan's neck like snow, 
Befit those gracious girls of long ago, 
Who in closed gardens took the quiet air; 
Who lived the ordered life gently to pass 
From earth as from rose petals perfumes go. 
Or shadows from that dial in the grass ; 
Whose fingers from the painted spinet keys 
Drew small heart-clutching melodies. 



II 
DO not ask so much, 
— O, bright-hued; oh, tender-eyed — 
As you should sometimes shimmer at my side, 
Oh, Fair. 



I do not crave a touch, 
Nor, at your comings hither, 
Sound of soft laughter, savour of your hair. 
Sight of your face ; oh fair, oh full of grace, 
I ask not, I. 

But that you do not die, 
Nor fade, oh bright, nor wither. 
That somewhere in the world your sweet, dim face 
Be unattainable, unpaled by fears, 
Unvisited by years. 
Stained by no tears. 

103 



Ill 

COME in the delicate stillness of dawn, 
Your eyelids heavy with sleep ; 
When the faint moon slips to its line — dim- 
drawn, 
Grey and a shadow, the sea. And deep, very deep. 
The tremulous stillness ere day in the dawn. 

Come, scarce stirring the dew on the lawn, 

Your face still shadowed by dreams ; 
When the world's all shadow, and rabbit and fawn — 
Those timorous creatures of shadows and gleams ; 
And twilight and dewlight, still people the lawn. 

Come, more real than life is real. 

Your form half seen in the dawn ; 
A warmth half felt, like the rays that steal 
Hardly revealed from the East; oh warmth of my 

breast, 
O life of my heart, oh intimate solace of me . . . 
So, when the landward breeze winds up from the 

quickening sea, 
And the leaves quiver of a sudden and life is here and 
the day, 
You shall fade away and pass 
As — when we breathed upon your mirror's glass — 
Our faces died away. 



104 



IV 

IF we could have remembrance now 
And see, as in the winter's snow 
We shall, what's golden in these hours. 
The flitting, swift, intangible desires of sea and 
strand ! 

Who sees what's golden where we stand ? 
The sky's too bright, the sapphire sea too green ; 
I, I am fevered, you cold-sweet, serene, 
And . . . and . . . 

Yet looking back in days of snow 
Unto this olden day that's now, 
We'll see all golden in these hours 
This memory of ours. 



IDS 



IT was the Autumn season of the year 
When ev'ry little bird doth ask his mate: 
"I wonder if the Spring will find us here, 
It groweth late." 

I saw two Lovers walking through the grass, 

And the sad He unto his weeping Dear 

Did say. "Alas! 

When Spring comes round I shall no more be here, 

For I must sail across the weary sea 

And leave the waves a-churn 'twixt you and me. 

" Oh, blessed Autumn ! blest late Autumn-tide ! 

For ever with thy mists us Lovers hide. 

Ignore Time's laws 

And leave thy scarlet haws 

For ever on the dewy-dripping shaws 

Of this hillside. 

Until the last, despite of Time and Tide, 

Give leave that we may wander in thy mist, 

With the last, dread 

Word left for aye unsaid 

And the last kiss unkisst." 

It was the Autumn season of the year. 
When ev'ry little bird doth ask his mate : 
' ' I wonder if the Spring will find us here, 
It groweth late." 



io6 



VI 

WHEN all the little hills are hid in snow, 
And all the small brown birds by frost are 
slain, 
And sad and slow the silly sheep do go 
All seeking shelter to and fro; 

Come once again 
To these familiar, silent, misty lands ; 
Unlatch the lockless door 
And cross the drifted floor ; 
Ignite the waiting, ever- willing brands, 
And warm thy frozen hands 
By the old flame once more. 
Ah, heart's desire, once more by the old fire stretch 
out thy hands. 



107 



ON THE HILLS 

KEEP your brooding sorrows for dewy- 
misty hollows. 
Here's blue sky and lark song, drink the 
air. The joy that follows 
Drafts of wine o' west wind, o' north wind, o' 

summer breeze. 
Never grape's hath equalled from the wine hills 
by the summer seas. 
Whilst the breezes live, joy shall contrive, 
Still to tear asunder, and to scatter near and far 
Those nets small and thin 
That spider sorrows spin 
In the brooding hollows where no breezes are. 



io8 



SIDERA CADENTIA 

(ON THE DEATH OF QUEEN VICTORIA) 

WHEN one of the old, little stars doth fall 
from its place, 
The eye, 
Glimpsing aloft must sadden to see that its space 

In the sky 
Is darker, lacking a spot of its ancient, shimmering 

grace, 
And sadder, a little, for loss of the glimmer on high. 

Very remote, a glitter, a mote far away, is your star, 
But its glint being gone from the place where it shone 
The night's somewhat grimmer and something is 

gone 
Out of the comforting quiet of things as they are. 

A shock, 
A change in the beat of the clock ; 
And the ultimate change that we fear feels a little 
less far. 



109 



NIGHT PIECE 

AH, of those better tides of dark and melancholy — 
AX When one's abroad, in a field — the night very 
* *- deep, very holy ; 
The turf very sodden a-foot, walking heavy — the 

small ring of light, 
O' the lanthorn one carries, a-swinging to left and to 

right. 
Revealing a flicker of hedgerow, a flicker of rushes 

— and Night 
Ev'rywhere; ev'rywhere sleep and a hushing to 

sleep — 
I know that I never shall utter the uttermost secrets 

aright, 
They lie so deep. 



no 



THANKS WHILST UNHARNESSING 

I 

[He gets dmtin from the cart.) 

WEST'RING the last silver light doth gleam, 
Whilst in the welling shimmer of the lamp 
From the tired horse the blanketing of steam 
Flickers and whirls aloft into the damp 
Sharp winter darkness. In the deadened air 
The long, still night doth settle ever)avhere. 
And hark! there comes the rapt, sweet, crooning 

snatches 
Of song from where the little robin watches 
Close in the thorn, beyond the ring of light. 

II 

{He speaks towards the bushes.) 

Softest of all the birds that sing at night. 
For the most mellowest sound. 
That the long year brings round. 

Sweet robin. I give thanks and love you best 
Of birds that nest. 

{He follows the horse in, humming.) 

Sing ! it is well, though the rest of life be bitter, 
Sing ! {I swill the oats in the trough and loose the girth .) 
Warble ! It is well. [There's a rustle in the litter : 
Thats the old grey rat.) It is well upon the earth. 



Ill 



Ill 

Clotht-up and snug and warm, a-munching oats 
Old Tom doth make a comfortable sound, 
A rhythmic symphony for your sweet notes. 

[He speaks from the stable door.) 

Small brother, flit in here, since all around 
The frost hath gripped the ground ; 
And oh ! I would not like to have you die. 
We's help each other, 
Little Brother Beady-eye. 

( The Robin flits in.) 

There — Sing! Warm and mellow the lanthorn lights 
the stable. 
Little brother, sing! In-a-doors beside the hearth. 
Slippers are a-toast, and the tea's upon the table. 
Robin when you sing it is "well upon the earth. 
[He closes the stable door and enters the cottage.) 



112 



GREY MATTER 

THEY leave us nothing. 
He. Still, a little's left. 

She. A crabbed, ancient, dried biologist, 
Somewhere very far from the sea, closed up from the 

sky. 
Shut in from the leaves, destroys our hopes and us. 

He. Why, no, our hopes and . . . 

She. Inhis"ErsterHeft." 

Page something, I forget the line, he says 
That, hidden as deep in the brain as he himself from 

hope. 
There's this grey matter. 

He. Why, 'tis there, dear heart. 

She. That, if that hidden matter cools, decays. 
Dies — what you will — our souls die out as well ; 
Since, hidden in the millionth of a cell. 
Is all we have to give us consciousness. 

He. Suppose it true. 

She. Ah, never ; better die, 

Better have never lived than face this mist, 
Better have never toiled to such distress. 

He. It matters little. 

She. Little !— Where shall I, 

The woman, where shall you take part. 
My poet ? Where has either of us scope 
In this dead-dawning century that lacks all faith. 
All hope, all aim, and all the mystery 
That comforteth. Since he victorious 
With his cold vapours chill out you and me. 
The woman and the poet ? 

He. Never, dear. 

For you and I remain. 
The woman and the poet. And soft rain 
Still falls and still the crocus flames, 

H 113 



The blackbird calls. 

She. But half the sweet is gone. 

The voices of our children at their games 
Lack half their ring. 

He. Why, never, dear. Out there, 

The sea's a cord of silver, still to south 
Beyond the marsh. 

She. Ah, but beyond it all. 

And allbeneath and all above, half of the glory's done. 
And I and you 

He. Why, no. The ancient sun 

Shines as it ever shone, and still your mouth 
Is sweet as of old it was. 

She. But what remains ? 

He. All the old pains. 
And all the old sweet pleasures and the mystery 
Of time, slow travel and unfathomed deep. 

She. And then this cold extinction ? . . . 

He. Dreamless sleep. 

She. And nothing matters ? 

He. All the old, old things. 

Whether to Church or College rings 
The clamorous bell of creeds, 
We, in the lush, far meads. 
Poet and woman, past the city walls, 
Hear turn by turn the burden of their calls, 
Believe what we believe, feel what we feel, 
Like what we list of what they cry within 

Cathedral or laborat'ry, 
Since, by the revolution of the wheel. 
The one swings under, let us wait content. 

She. Yet it is hard. 

He. Ah no. A sure intent, 

For me and you. 
The right, true, joyful word, the sweet, true phrase, 
The calling of our children from the woods these gar- 
den days 
114 



Remain. — These drops of rain have laid the dust 
And in our soft brown seed-beds formed the crust 
We needed for our sowings. Bring your seed, 
And you shall prick it in, I close the row. 
Be sure the little grains your hands have pressed 
Tenderly, lovingly, home, shall flourish best. 

She. Aye you are still my poet. 

He. Even so 

Betwixt the rain and shine. Half true's still true 
More truly than the thing that's proved and dead. 
The sun lends flame to every crocus head 
Once more, and we once more must sow and weed 
Since in the earth the newly stirring seed 
Begins the ancient mystery anew. 



H2 115 



OLD MAN'S EVENSONG 



''TT^IS but a teeny mite 
I Hard, road side edge, 
-1- or missus' candle light 
Shines through thet broken hedge. 

Reach me my coat, lads, 

Give me a lift into it, 
Rowin' they tater-clads 

Tasks me to do it 
Terribly; 
Time was when I weer mad 

Diggin' by star's light. 
Now I am mortial glad 

T' reach my dure-ajar's light, 
'N' eat my tea. 

Reach me my tools, boys, 

Ah mun quit this talk 'n' lurry ; 
Theer's my ol' missus' voice 

Calls: " or meastur, hurry, 
Y'r tea-time's come." 
Smells from the chimney side 

Sniff down this plaguy mist, 
Wanst I'd wander far an' wide, 

Now I'm terr'ble stiff an' whist 
'N' stay at home. 

'Tis but a yeard or two 

Hard road, thank God. 
Then off the hard an' goo 

Home on the sod. 



ii6 



CHILDREN'S SONG 

SOMETIMES wind and sometimes rain, 
Then the sun comes back again ; 
Sometimes rain and sometimes snow, 
Goodness, how we'd like to know 
Why the weather alters so. 

When the weather's really good 
We go nutting in the wood; 
When it rains we stay at home, 
And then sometimes other some 
Of the neighbours' children come. 

Sometimes we have jam and meat, 
All the things we like to eat ; 
Sometimes we make do with bread 
And potatoes boiled instead. 
Once when we were put to bed 
We had nowt and mother cried, 
But that was after father died. 

So, sometimes wind and sometimes rain, 
Then the sun comes back again ; 
Sometimes rain and sometimes snow, 
Goodness, how we'd like to know 
If things will always alter so. 



117 



FROM THE SOIL 

(TWO MONOLOGUES) 

I 

The Field Labourer speaks. 

AH am a mighty simple man and only- 
Good wi' my baggin' hook and sichlike and 'tis 
lonely 
Wheer Ah do hedge on Farmer Finn his farm. 

Often Ah gits to thinking 
When it grows dark and the ol' sun's done sinking, 
And Ah hev had my sheere 

Of fear 
And wanted to feel sure that God were near 

And goodly warm — 
As near as th'eldritch shave I were at wark about . . . 

Plenty o' time for thinking 
We hes between the getting up and sinking 
Of that ol' sun — about the God we tark about . . . 



In the beginning God made Heaven and 
The 'Arth, 'n Sea we sometimes hear a-calling 
When wind she bloweth from the rainy land 
An' says ther'll soon be wet an' rain a-falling. 

Ah'll give you, parson, God he made the sea, 
An' made this 'Arth, ner yit Ah wo-an't scrimmage 
But what He made the sky ; what passes me 
Is that what follows : " Then the Lord made we 
In his own image." 

For, let alone the difference in us creatures. 
Some short o' words like me, and others preachers 
With stores of them, like you; some fair, some midd- 
lin', 
ii8 



Some black-avis'd like you and good at fiddlin', 
Some crabb'd, some mad, some mighty gay and 

pleasant, 
No two that's more alike than jackdaw is to pheasant, 
We're poorish stuff at best. 

We doesn't last no time before we die, 
Nor leave more truck behind than they poor thrushes. 
You find, stiff feathers, laid aside the bushes 
After a hard ol' frost in Janu-ry. 
or crow he lives much longer, 
or mare's a de-al stronger 
'N the hare's faster . . . 
If so be God's like we and we like He 

The man's as good's his Master. 

You are a civil, decent-spoken man. Muss Parson. 
'N' /don't think ye'U say this kind o' tark is worse'n 

arson — 
That's burning stacks, I think — sure/y it isn' meant 

so, 

I tell you. Parson, no; 
'N' us poor folk we doesn't want to blame 
You parsons fer the things that's said and sung 
Up there in church. My apple tree is crook'd because 

'twere bent so 
When it were young. 

'N' them as had you preacher-folk to tame. 
Taught you the tales that you are bound to tell 

Us folk below 
About three Gods that's one an' Heav'n an' Hell, 
An' things us folk ain't meant to understand. 
I tell you, sir, we men that's on the land 
Needs summut we can chew when trouble's brewing, 
When our ol' 'ooman's bad an' rent is due 

'N' we no farden, 
'N' when it's late to sow 'n' still too wet to dig the 

garden, 

119 



Something as we can chew like that ol' cow be chew- 

Something told plain and something we gits holt on, 
— You need a simple sort o' feed to raise a colt on — 
We needs it, parson, life's a bitter scrimmage, 
Livin' and stuggin' in the mud and things we do 

Enow confound us ; 
We hain't no need for fear 
Of God, to make the living hardly worth 

Vou tell us, sir, that " God He made this Earth 

In His own image," 
An' make the Lord seem near. 
So's we could think that when we come to die 

We'll lie 
In this same goodly 'Arth, an' things goo on around 
us 

Much as they used to goo. 

II 

T/te Small Farmer soliloquizes. 

I wonder why we toiled upon the earth 
From sunrise until sunset, dug and delved, 
Crook-backed, cramp -fingered, making little marks 
On the unmoving bosoms of the hills, 
And nothing came of it. And other men 
In the same places dug and delved and ended 
As we have done; and other men just there 
Shall do the self-same things until the end. 
I wonder why we did it. . . . Underneath 
The grass that fed my sheep, I often thought 
Something lay hidden, some sinister thing 
Lay looking up at us as if it looked 
Upwards thro' quiet waters; that it saw 
Us futile toilers scratching little lines 
And doing nothing. And maybe it smiled 
Because it knew that we must come to this. . . . 
1 20 



I lay and heard the rain upon the roof 
AH night when rain spelt ruin, lay and heard 
The east wind shake the windows when that wind 
Meant parched up land, dried herbage, blighted 

wheat, 
And ruin, always ruin creeping near 
In the long droughts and bitter frosts and floods. 
And when at dawning I went out-a-doors 
I used to see the top of the tall shaft 
O' the workhouse here, peep just above the downs. 
It was as if the thing were spying, waiting, 
Watching my movements, saying, "You will come. 
Will come at last to me." And I am here . . . 
And down below that Thing lay there and smiled ; 
Or no, it did not smile ; it was as if 
One might have caught it smiling, but one saw 
The earth immovable, the unmoved sheep 
And senseless hedges run like little strings 
All over hill and dale. . . . 



121 



WISDOM 



THE young girl questions: "Whether were it 
better 
To lie for ever, a warm slug-a-bed 
Or to rise up and bide by Fate and Chance, 
The rawness of the morning, 
The gibing and the scorning 
Of the stern Teacher of my ignorance ? " 
" I know not," Wisdom said. 

The young girl questions : " Friend, shall I die calmer. 
If I've lain for ever, sheets above the head, 
Warm in a dream, or rise to take the worst 
Of peril in the highways 
Of straying in the by-ways. 
Of hunger for the truth, of drought and thirst? " 
"We do not know," he said, 
"Nor may till we be dead." 



122 



THE POSY-RING 

(AFTER CLEMENT MAROT) 

THIS on thy posy-ring I've writ: 
" True Love and Faith " 
For, failing Love, Faith droops her head, 
And lacking faith, why love is dead 

And's but a wraith. 
But Death is stingless where they've lit 
And stayed, whose names hereon I've writ. 



123 



u 



THE GREAT VIEW 

P here, where the air's very clear 

And the hills slope away nigh down to the bay, 

It is very like Heaven . . . 



For the sea's wine-purple and lies half asleep 
In the sickle of the shore and, serene in the west. 
Lion-like purple and brooding in the even. 
Low hills lure the sun to rest. 

Very like Heaven For the vast marsh dozes, 

And waving plough-lands and willowy closes 

Creep and creep up the soft south steep; 

In the pallid North the grey and ghostly downs do 

fold away. 
And, spinning spider-threadlets down the sea, the 

sea-lights dance 
And shake out a wavering radiance. 

Very like Heaven For a shimmering of pink. 

East, far east, past the sea-lights' distant blink, 
Like a cloud shell-pink, like the ear of a girl. 
Like Venice-glass mirroring mother-o'-pearl. 
Like the small pink nails of my lovely lady's fingers, 
Where the skies drink the sea and the last light lies 

and lingers, 
There is France. 



124 



WIFE TO HUSBAND 

IF I went past you down this hill 
And you had never seen my face before, 
Would all your being feel the sudden thrill 
You said it felt, once more ? 

If I went past you through this shaw. 

Would be all a-quiver at the brush 

Of my trailed garments ; would the sudden hush 

You said the black-birds' voices had in awe 

Of my first coming, fall upon the place 

Once more, if you had never seen my face 

Nor ever heard my passing by before. 

And nought had passed of all that was of yore ? 



125 



A NIGHT PIECE 

AS I lay awake by my good wife's side, 
/\ And heard the clock tick through a night in June, 
ji *■! thought of a song with a haunting tune ; 
But the songs that betide, 
And the tunes that we hear in the ear when the June 

moon rides in the sky, 
Fade and die away with the coming of the day. 
And my haloed angels with golden wings, 
And the small sweet bells that rang in tune. 
And the strings that quivered above the quills. 
And all my mellow imaginings 
Faded and died away at the coming of the day 
With the gradual growth and spread of grey 
Above the hills. 



126 



TO CHRISTINA AT NIGHTFALL 

LITTLE thing, ah, little mouse, 
Creeping through the twilit house, 
^To watch within the shadow of my chair 
With large blue eyes; the firelight on your hair 
Doth glimmer gold and faint. 
And on your woollen gown 
That folds a-down 
From steadfast little face to square-set feet. 

Ah, sweet ! ah, little one ! so like a carven saint, 
With your unflinching eyes, unflinching face. 
Like a small angel, carved in a high place, 
Watching unmoved across a gabled town ; 
When I am weak and old, 
And lose my grip, and crave my small reward 
Of tolerance and tenderness and ruth. 
The children of your dawning day shall hold 
The reins we drop and wield the judge's sword 
And your swift feet shall tread upon my heels. 
And I be Ancient Error, you New Truth, 
And I be crushed by your advancing wheels . . . 

Good-night ! The fire is burning low. 

Put out the lamp ; 
Lay down the weary little head 
Upon the small white bed. 
Up from the sea the night winds blow 
Across the hill across the marsh ; 
Chill and harsh, harsh and damp. 
The night winds blow. 
But, while the slow hours go, 
I, who must fall before you, late shall wait and keep 
Watch and ward, 
Vigil and guard, 
Where you sleep. 
Ah, sweet ! do you the like where I lie dead. 

127 



TWO FRESCOES 

It occurred to me that a series of frescoes might arise dealing 
with the fortunes of Roderick the Goth. Having neither wall nor 
brushes I have tried to put two of them upon paper. 



THE TOWER 

DOWN there where Europe's arms 
Stretch out to Africa, 
Throughout the storms, throughout the calms 
Of centuries it took the alms 
Of sun and rain ; the loud alarms 
Of war left it unmoved; and grey 
And brooding there it watched the strip of foam 
And fret of ruffled waters, was the home 
Of the blue rock-dove and the birds o' the main. 

Coming from Africa 

The swallows rested on it flying north 

In spring-time ; rested there again, 

When the days shorten, speeding on the way 

Homewards to Africa. 

Back and forth 

The tiny ships below sped ; east and west 

It was called blest 

By mariners it guided. Mystery 

Hung round it like a veil. The ancient Ones, 

They said, had seen it rise 

Upwards to the old suns. 

Upwards to the old skies. 

When Hercules 

Did bid it guard those seas. 

It was a thing of the Past ; 
Stood there untroubled; like a virgin, dreamed; 
And not a man of all that land but deemed 
The tower sacred. 
128 



It was a symbol of an ancient faith, 

Some half-forgotten righteousness, some Truth, 

Some virtue in the land whose tillers said : 

" Whilst that stands unenforced, it is well." 

Be sure the thing is even so to-day, 

Our tower doth somewhere unenforced rise 

Upwards to our old skies. 

And if we suffer sacrilegious hands 

To force its innocence, our knell shall ring 

As it rang out for them on that old day 

Knolling firom Africa. 

You say it was the King who did this thing. 

Who sinned against this righteousness. But say : 

If we stand by and with averted eyes. 

Or, shrugging shoulders, let our rulers sin 

Against the very virtue of the race. 

Who is it then but us must bear the pains 

Of Nemesis? Ah, yes, it was the King. . . . 



II 

GOTHS 

"Let the stars flame by as the flaming earth falls 
down, 
Ruined fall the earth as the clanging heavens fall. 
Clasp me, love of mine; be the jewels in my crown 
But the firelit tears of Gods, of the Ancient Ones of 
all." 

The swart King paced his palace wall 
And down below the maids at ball 
Sang in choir at evenfall 
As they played : 

I 129 



" Make our couch of Greece and the footstool for our 

throne 
Of Rome, throw scented Spain for the incense of 

our fire, 
Bring me all the East for the jewels in my zone, 
Cast them all together for our leaping wedding 

pyre." 

And he looked down 

Into their cloistral shade 

And saw, without the tongues of shadow thrown 

By wall and tree of that sequestered place 

One girl who had the sunlight on her face, 

Who swayed and clapped her hands and sang alone. 

" My father can but die," she sang, 

" My mother can but weep, 

This weary town fall blazing down 

And be a smouldering heap 

Beneath the flame 

Where I was wont to keep 

My weary vigil till my lover came." 

Chanting in her pauses all the girls within the 

close 
Sang to her singing, and their hidden chorus rose 
Like a wave, fell like falling asleep. 
And for the King, her voice like fiery wine 
Set all his pulses throbbing and her face 
Did dazzle more than did the blood-red sun. 

" He who would win me, let him woo like this, 
Flames on his face and the blood upon his hands, 
Ravish me away when the blackening embers hiss 
As the red flesh weeps to the brands." 
130 



That King was one who reignfed there alone 
Upon those very confines of the world, 
Where conquering races ebb to sloth and sink 
As still great rivers sink into the sands. 
And — for his fathers had been rav'ning wolves 
Who coursed through ruin, pestilence and death 
When all the world flamed red from end to end — 
That ancient song of his destroying race 
The girl sang stirred the fibres of his frame 
Till all the earth was red before his face. 
It had been so the women sang of old 
To his forgotten sires, and still they sang 
Within the shadow of his palace wall, 
The cloister of his grimmest liege of all. 
And as she sang the ferment worked in her 
And shook her virgin's voice to jarring notes. 
Stirring in her the ancient cry of throats 
Torn with the passions of the ancient days. 

" Pour me blood o' gods ; bring me broken oaths for 

toys 
Countless of the cost, of their ruin, of thine own ; 
Drunk with wine and passion, drink thy moment's 

fill of joys. 
Godlike, beastlike, manlike, drink and cast thy cup 

a- down; 
Lose thy life ; give thy crown. 
Lose thy soul, give thine all, 
As we sink to death and ruin with the smoke o' worlds 

for pall." 

And so she raised her eyes and saw the King 
Stand frowning down, his face inspired with flame 
Fro' the west'ring sun. And then the Angelus 
Chimed out across the silent land of Spain. 
Beyond the strip of foam the imaums called. 
And Africa and Europe fell to prayer. 

12 131 



But those two gazing in each other's eyes 
Looked back into the hollows of the years. 
And as he stood above his brooding land 
It was as if she saw her sires again. 
Flames shone upon his face and on his hands 
Incarnadined; whenas the sun sank down 
He raised his eyes and seemed to see that Spain 
Was all on fire with blood upon the roofs. 
And down to South the inviolate, pallid tower 
Rose silent, pointing to the crescent moon 
And that great peering planet called Soheil, 
That heralds, as Mahomet's doctors say, 
His domination and his children's sway. 
Rose over Africa. 



132 



VOLKSWEISE 



A POOR girl sat by a tower of the sea 
All a-wringing of her hands; "Will he never 
show," says she, 
"Just as a token, just a glimmer of his ship's lant . . . 
horn?" 

" Oh, all ye little grains of sand 
Twist into a rope shall draw his keel 
Hither. Oh, ye little gulls and terns. 
Join wings and bear me from this strand 
To where I'll feel 

His arms, and find where on the foam his ship is 
borne." 

A poor girl sat, etc. 

" Oh, all ye little stars o' the night 

Come down and cluster in my hair ; 

Oh, bright night-flashes o' the waves 

Shine round me till I'm all one flame of light. 

So, far at sea. 

He'll deem a beacon beckons him to me. ..." 

A poor girl sat nigh a tower of the sea 

All a-wringing qjF her hands; " Will he never show" 

said she, 
" Just a token, just a glimmer of his ship's lant . . . 

homr 



133 



AND AFTERWARDS 

(A SAVAGE SORT OF SONG ON THE ROAD) 

" /^"^ NCE / was a gallant and bold I 
I I And you so tender and true, 
V«^ Bu,t ril never again be the old I 
Nor yoti the old you. 

I shall go lounging along on the edge 

Of the grass You'll loiter along by the hedge. 

I shall go dogged through dust and the dirt 
Like an ass in my moods. 
You with a new sweetheart at your skirt 
Ev'ry few roods. . . . 

" Once I was a gallant" etc. 

We'll maybe jog along together 

A long way; 

Maybe put up with the weather together, 

Better or worse 

As it chances day by day, 

Or maybe part with a kick and a curse 

I and you, 

After a turning or two 

" But I'll never again," etc. 



1 34 



ON A MARSH ROAD 

(WINTER NIGHTFALL) 

A BLUFF of cliff, purple against the south, 
And nigh one shoulder-top an orange pane. 
^This wet, clean road; clear twilight held in the 
pools, 
And ragged thorns, ghost reeds and dim, dead wil- 
lows. 

Past all the windings of these grey, forgotten valleys. 
To west, past clouds that close on one dim rift — 
The golden plains; the infinite, glimpsing distances, 
The eternal silences; dim lands of peace. 

Infinite plains to know no wanderer's foot; infinite 

distances where alooe is rest; 
All-virgin downs where none shall pasture sheep; 

inviolable peaks that none shall climb, 
From whose summit nor you nor I shall gaze on 

ocean's infinite beyond. 
Nor none look back upon this world folding to-night, 

to rain and to sleep. 



135 



AN END PIECE 

CLOSE the book and say good-bye to every- 
thing; 
Pass up from the shore and pass by b5rre and 
stall, 
— For the smacks shall sail home on the tail of the 

tides, 
And the kine shall stand deep in the sweet water 

sides. 
And they still shall go burying, still wedding brides, 
But I must be gone in the morning. 

One more look, and so farewell, sweet summering. 
One moment more and then no more at all. 
For the skipper shall summon his hands to the sea, 
And the shepherd still shepherd his sheep on the lea, 
But it's over and done with the man that was me, 
As over the hill comes the morning. 



t36 



V 

"POEMS FOR PICTURES" 

Note. — The following poems were printed in the 
volume of the same title published by Mr Macqueen 
in 1897. 



LOVE IN WATCHFULNESS 

UPON THE SHEEPDOWNS 

SAIL, oh sail away, 
Oh sail, ye clouds, above my face, 
Here where I lie ; 
Trail, oh trail away 
Ye ling'ring minutes and give place 
To hours that fly. 

But when I hear an echo mutter, 

Soft up the slope of golden gorse. 

Oh, when I see a distant horse, 

When I shall see, afar, a kerchief flutter 

Among the shrouds 

And driving veils of mist, you'll sail away you 

hours and clouds. 
You'll sail away. 



>39 



AFTER ALL 



YES, what's the use of striving on ? 
And what's to show when all is done ? 
The bells will toll as now they toil, 
Here's an old lilt will summarize the whole : 

" This fell about in summertide, 
About the midmost of the year, 
Our master did to covert ride 
To drive the fallow deer. 

Chanced we upon the Douglas men ere ever one 
of us was ware. 

"Then sped a shaft from covert side 
And pierced in behind his ear ; 
This fell about in summertide 
At midmost of the year." 

So down he fell and rested there 
Among the sedge hard by the brook, 
About the midmost of the year 
His last and lasting rest he took. 

And so, " This fell in winter late. 
Or ever Candlemas drew near, 
His bride had found another mate 
Before the ending of the year. 

" His goshawks decked another's wrists, 

His hounds another's voice did fear. 

His men another's errands ride 

His steed another burden bear. 

Him they forgot by Christraastide. 

Ere Candlemas drew near." 

140 



Our hounds shall know another leash, 
Our men another master know, 
And we reck little of it all, so we but find good 
rest below. 

So what's the use of striving on ? 

And what's to show when all is done ? 

The ring of bells will chime and chime. 

And all the rest's just waste — just waste of time. 



141 



THE OLD FAITH TO THE CONVERTS 

" WT" /"HEN the world is growing older, 

\ \ / And the road leads down and down and 

VV down, 
And the wind is in the bare tree-tops 
And the meadows sodden with much rain, 
Seek me here in the old places. 
And here, where I dwell, you shall find me," 
Says the old Faith we are leaving. 

"When the muscles stiffen, 
Eyes glaze, ears lose their keenness, 
When the mind loses its familiar nimbleness, 
And the tongue no longer voices it, speeds before 

it, follows it. 
Seek me here in the old places, [find me," 

And here, where I have always dwelt, you shall 
Says the old Faith we are leaving. 

" I shall not watch your going down the road. 
Not even to the turning at the hill, 
Not for me to hear you greet the strange women. 
Not for me to see them greet you. 
They shall be many and many the houses you shall 

enter, but never shall house be like to mine," 
Says the old Faith we are leaving. 

"You shall hear strange new songs. 
But never song like the one I sing by your pillow ; 
You shall breathe strange new scents, [the linen. 
But never scent like that of the herbs I strew 'mid 
Go ! I give you time to make holiday. 
Travel, travel, fare into far countries. 
But you shall come back again to the old places. 
And here, where I have always dwelt, you shall 

find me," 
Says the old Faith we are leaving. 

But we — we shall never return. 
142 



STAETHELBURGA 

FOR A PICTURE 

St Aethelburga, daughter of Athelbert, King of Kent, wedded 
Aedwin, King of Northumbria. Him and thereafter his whole folk 
she won for the worship of Christianity. But in the end he was 
slain by Penda, a heathen, who took the land. Then did St 
Aethelburga return into Kent and found the convent and church 
at Lyminge, where she died. 

To purge our minds of haste, pass from an age outworn 

And travel to the depths of tranquil times long past; 

Sinking as sinks a stone through waters of a tarn, 

Be fitting things and meet: 

And, look you, on our walls hang treasures from such depths, 

OUEEN, saint, evangelist; sweet, patient, fain 
to wait 
With crucifix in hand, broad brow and haloed 

crown 
Half-hidden by the coif, she enters through that gate. 
She enters through that door, where tapestry drawn 

back 
Left seen, a moment since, an apple lawn ; but moors 
Spread far away beyond. That span of shorn green 

turf. 
Won from the heather's grasp, will whisper of regret 
For far-off swarded downs — 

For far-off Kentish downs, soft sky and glint of sea. 
Sweet chime of convent bells and flower scents ot 

home. 

Here, in a Northern land, where skies are grey and 

hearts 
Are slow to gather warmth: where Truth is slow to 

spread. 
And gibes spring swift to lips; home thoughts are 

bitter sweet. 
Saint in a pagan court, Queen of a wav'ring King, 
She murmurs inly, "Wait," clasps tight the crucifix. 
Enters the narrow door and passes up the hall. 

U3 



In those old homespun days, the voices of a court, 
The whispers that are passed behind the dais-seats 
By fearers of a frown, came to the war-lord's ear 
In some shrewd jester's jape : [her. 

And some such licensed fool now voiced the folk for 
These lovers of their mead, strong beef and rolling 

song. 
Liked little her soft ways, her Friday fasts and chants 
That rose and fell unmarked, unrhythmic and un- 

rhymed — 
Her sweet and silent ways and distant-gazing eyes. 

" Mead and strong meats on earth and arrow flights 

on earth, 
What boots the rest ? " they said, 
Questions their jester her: 

" Oh, Queen, of fasting fain. 
King's wife that scourge your flesh. 
King's daughter sadly clad. 
Sad shall be your estate, after sad faring here. 
If you be laid i' the grave and find no future state." 
To him the Queen : " True, son, but what shall be your 

fate. 
If future state there be ? " and crossed the rush-strewn 

floor. 
Thanking the Lord that found shrewd answers for 

shrewd jests. 
So fared she for awhile. In time her King was won, 
Knelt in the font and sloughed, beneath Paulinus' 

hands 
His scales of pagan sin. But when his time was come 
111 fared he 'fore his foes that sent his soul to God. 

So turned the sad Queen back and sought her 

brother's land, 
Just over those high downs, in a grey hollowed vale, 
She built her nunnery and rested there awhile. 
144 



(Maybe her feet once trod this yielding sheep -cropped 

sward — 
'Tis like her eyes once filled at sight of just that glint 
Of distant sun-kissed sea, out where the hill drops 

down.) 

So fared she for awhile, and when her time was come, 
Down there in Lyminge Church, she laid her weary 
limbs. 

And yet we see her stand: sad Queen, sweet, silent 

saint, 
With crucifix clasped close, low brow and distant 

gaze 
She enters through that gate. 



H5 



GRAY 

FOR A PICTURE 

THE firelight gilds the patterns on the walls, 
The yellow flames fly upwards from the brands, 
On fold and farm the sad grey twilight falls. 
And shrouds the downs and hides the hollow lands. 

And pensive is the hour and bids the brain 
Weave morals from the peeping things of dusk, 
Dwelling a moment on the darkling pane, 
The tapping roses and the pot of musk. 

That picture there — the one the firelight shows : 
The poet by a grave, beneath the may, 
With ready notebook and unrufiled brows 
And elegiac pose — you guess it's Gray. 

Below, beneath his rounded, withied grave, 
A ploughman sleeps, the tablet at his head 
Tells the short tale of life that such men have — 
The scarcely cold and half-forgotten dead 

Who " five and fifty years the furrows trod," 
Such were the time and toil of William Mead 
Who passed : " And now, he'sresting 'neath this sod," 
"And there's an end," you say. 'Twere so indeed. 

But William was a ploughman of the best, 

Who ploughed his furrow straight from hedge to 

shaws 
From sun in east to sun low down in west, 
With following of rooks and gulls and daws. 

He taught some score the honest trick of plough — 
Crop-headed yokels, youths of clay and loam — 
Who learnt his ways and gathered from him how 
To drive good team and draw straight furrow home. 
146 



Thus when his work was done and done his days 
He left a school of workers — to this day 
We recognize their touch — and owe due praise 
For bread and thought to such as he and Gray. 

Who ploughed such furrows each in his own field, 
Who sowed such seed and gathered in such grain, 
That we still batten on their well-sown yield, 
And wonder who shall do the like again. 



K2 147 



THE GIPSY AND THE CUCKOO 



" Brother, what's that bird tolling yonder?" 
" Why, Jasper, that's a cuckoo." 

" He's a roguish chaffing sort of bird, isn't he, brother?" 
" He is, Jasper." 

" But you rather like him, brother ? . . . well, brother, and what's 
a gipsy ? " — The Romany Rye. 

TELL me, brother, what's a cuckoo, but a roguish 
chaffing bird ? 
Not a nest's his own, no bough-rest's his own, 
and he's never man's good word, , 
But his call is musical and rings pleasant on the ear. 
And the spring would scarce be spring 
If the cuckoo did not sing 
In the leafy months o' the year. 

Tellme,brother, what's agipsy.butaroguishchafiing 

chap? 
Not a cot's his own, not a man would groan 
For a gipsy's worst mishap, 
But his tent looks quaint when bent 
On the sidesward of a lane. 
And you'd deem the rain more dreary 
And the long white road more weary 
If we never came again. 

Would your May days seem more fair 
Were we chals deep read in books, 
Were we cuckoos cawing rooks. 
All the world cathedral closes, 
Where the very sunlight dozes 
Were the sounds all organ pealing, psalm and song 
and prayer ? 



148 



THE GIPSY AND THE TOWNSMAN 

The Townsman 

PLEASANT enough in the seed time, 
Pleasant enough in the hay time, 
Pleasant enough in the grain time. 
When oaks don golden gowns. 
But the need time. 
The grey time, 
How bear ye them. 
How fare ye then 
When the rain clouds whip over the gorse on the 

downs, 
How bear ye, them, how fare ye then ? 

Gipsy 

We lie round the fire and we hark to the wind 
As it wails in the gorse and it whips on the down. 
And the wet- wood smoke drives us winking blind, 
But there's smoke and wind and woe in the town 
Harder to bear 

There than here in the saddest month of the weariest 
year. 



149 



THE SONG OF THE WOMEN 

A WEALDEN TRIO 

ist Voice 

WHEN ye've got a child 'ats whist for want of 
food, 
And a grate as grey's y'r 'air for want of 
wood, 
And y'r man and you ain't nowise not much good; 

Together 
Ch- 
it's hard work a-Christmassing, 
Carolling, 
Singin' songs about the "Babe what's born." 

znd Voice 

When ye've 'eered the bailiffs 'and upon the latch, 
And ye've feeled the rain a-trickling through the 

thatch, 
An' y'r man can't git no stones to break ner yit no 

sheep to watch — 

Together 
Ch- ^ 

We've got to come a-Christmassing, 
Carolling, 
Singin' of the "Shepherds on that morn." 

T,rd Voice, more cheerfully 

'E was a man's poor as us, very near. 

An' 'E 'ad 'is trials and danger. 

An' I think 'E'll think of us when 'E sees us singin' 

'ere; 
For 'is mother was poor, like us, poor dear, 
An' she bore Him in a manger. 
150 



Tozether 
Oh- * 

It's warm in the heavens, but it's cold upon the earth ; 
An' we ain't no food at table nor no fire upon the 

hearth; 
And it's bitter hard a-Christmassing, 
Carolling, 

Singin' songs about our Saviour's birth ; 
Singin' songs about the Babe what's born ; 
Singin' of the shepherds on that morn. 



151 



THE PEASANT'S APOLOGY 



DOWN near the earth 
On the steaming furrows 
Things are harsh and black enough 
Dearth there is and lack enough, 
And immemorial sorrows 
Stultify sweet mirth 
Till she borrows 
Bitterness and blackness from the earth. 



152 



AUCTIONEER'S SONG 






I OME up from the field, 
Come up from the fold, 
' For the farmer has broken , 
His things must be sold. 

Drive the flock from the fold, 
And the stock from the field, 
And the team from the furrow. 
And see what they yield. 

Coom up ! 

Come up from the marsh, 
Come down from the hops, 
Come down thro' the ventways, 
Come cater the copse. 

Come down from the hops, 
Come up from the marsh, 
Tho' selling be bitter 
And creditors harsh, 

Coom up ! 

Bring all you can find, 
Take the clock from the wall. 
The crocks from the dairy, 
The arm-chair and all. 

Tear the prints from the wall, 
Bring all you can find, 
Now turn up your collars, 
To keep out the wind. 

Bid up ! 

So come up from the field, come up from the fold. 
For the poor old farmer his things must be sold ; 
Come up from the fold, come up from the field. 
Now stand all together, let's see what they yield. 

Bid up! 

153 



ALDINGTON KNOLL 

THE OLD SMUGGLER SPEAKS 

AL'INGTON Knoll it stands up high, 
/\ Guidin' the sailors sailin' by, 
•* *- Stands up high fer all to see 
Cater the marsh and crost the sea. 

Al'ington Knoll's a mound a top, 
With a dick all round and it's bound to stop, 
For them as made it in them old days 
Sees to it well that theer it stays, 

For that ol' Knoll is watched so well 
By drownded men let outen Hell; 
They watches well and keeps it whole 
For a sailor's mark — the goodly Knoll. 

Farmer Finn as farms the ground 
Tried to level that goodly mound. 
But not a chap from Lydd to Lym' 
Thought that job were meant for him. 

Finn 'e fetched a chap fro' th' Sheeres, 
One o' yer spunky devil-may -keeres, 
Giv him a shovel and pick and spade, 
Promised him double what we was paid. 

He digged till ten, and he muddled on 

Till he'd digged up a sword and askillington — 

A grit old sword as long as me. 

An' grit ol' bones as you could see. 

He digged and digged the livelong day. 
Till the sun went down in Fairhght Bay; 
He digged and digged, and behind his back 
The lamps shone out and the marsh went black, 

154 



And the sky in the west went black from red, 
An' the wood went black — an' the man was dead. 
But wheer he'd digged the chark shone white 
Out to sea like Calais light. 

Al'ington Knoll it stands up high, 
Guidin' the sailors sailin' by. 
Stands up high for all to see 
Cater the marsh and crost the sea. 



155 



A PAGAN 



BRIGHT white clouds and April skies 
May make your heart feel bonny, 
But summer's sun and flower's growth 
Will fill my hives with honey, 
And mead is sweet to a pugging tooth 
When it's dark at four and snow clouds rise. 

Owl light's sweet if the moon be bright. 

And trysting's no bad folly, 

But give me mead and a warm hearthstone, 

And a cosy pipe and Dolly 

— And Dolly to devil a mutton bone 

When it's dark at four of a winter's night. 



156 



OLD WINTER 

OLD Winter's hobbling down the road, 
Dame Autumn's cloak looks frosty grey 
With a furry edge. 
We deemed it berry red in the ray 
The sun vouchsafed the dying day 
E'en now through the gap in the hedge. 

Chorus 

Spring's gone, Summer's past. 
Autumn will never, never catch them, 
But Winter hobbles along so fast 
You'd almost think he'd match them. 

Old Winter carries a heavy load. 
Sticks and stakes to your heart's desire. 
But as for me, 

I'll not tramp in the Autumn mire. 
But sit and blink at the merry fire 
And hark to the kettle's minstrelsy. 

Chorus 

Spring's gone. Summer's past, 
Autumn was mellow, mellow yellow. 
But for all old Winter's hollow blast 
He's not such a bad old fellow. 



»57 



THE PEDLAR LEAVES THE BAR 
PARLOUR AT DYMCHURCH 

GOOD NIGHT, we'd best be jogging on, 
The moon's been up a while, 
We've got to get to Bonnington, 
Nigh seven mile. 

But the marsh ain'd so lone if you've heered a good 

song. 
And you hum it aloud as you cater along, 
Nor the stiles half so high, nor the pack so like lead. 
If you've heered a good tale an' it runs in your head. 

So, come, we'd best be jogging on. 
The moon will give us light, 
We've got to get to Bonnington, 
To sleep to-night. 



158 



AN ANNIVERSARY 



Two decades and a minute, 
And half a moon in the sky, 
Like a broken willow pattern plate 
And a jangling bell to din it. 
Dingle — dong — twelve strokes — 
Two decades and a minute. 



159 



BEGINNINGS 

FOR ROSSETTI'S FIRST PAINTING 

WHETHER the beginnings of things notable 
Have in them anything worth noting. 
Whether an acorn's worth the thinking of 
Or eagle's egg suggests the sweep of wings in the 

clear blue, 
Is just an idle question. 

There's this: 

If you should hold the acorn 'twixt your fingers, 

You'll conjure up an oak maybe, 

A great gnarled trunk, criss-crossed and twisting 
branches 

And quivering of leaves. 

Or if the egg lies in the hollow of your hand, 

And the possessor says, " It is an eagle's." 

You'll deem you're looking up into high heaven, 

And see, far, far above you. 

Leisurely circling, now amongst the clouds, now 
against the sun, 

A careless span of pinions; 

You'll see, maybe, in short, such oaks and eagle- 
flights 

As never were, save in an idler's dream. 

But then again : 

An acorn's just an acorn, food for swine, and never 

(The chances are so great, so very great against it), 

Never will become a tempest-breasting oak. 

And then this eagle's egg, 
It's blown and empty of its contents, 
And just reposes on its cotton wool 
In a collector's box. 
i6o 



So with these sketches : 

Maybe you'll let them trick you into dreaming 
A hundred masterpieces : 
Halls full of never-to-be-equalled brushwork : 
Or let the music of a witching name beguile you 
To the remembrance of a master's sonnets. 
Or you may say, with just a tilting of the nose to- 
wards heaven : 

" The thing's amiss — it's worthless, 

We've seen a daub as good 

Hang flapping unobserved in such a High Street, 

Decked with the faded, weather-beaten effigy 

Of so-and-so of noble memory — 

The thing's amiss, it's worthless." 

And yet — it's just a question. 



i6i 



AT THE BAL MASQUE 

Columbine to Pierrot 

[She hums her words.) 

AH — Ah — Ah — if you ask for a love like that, 
Qu'est c'-Qu'est c'-Qu'est c'que tu fais dans 
1^ cette galfere ? 
Hark — Hark — Hark — Hear the twittering, rustling 

feet: 
Alors, qu'est ce-e, qu'est ce-e qu'on peut faire. 

She speaks. 

Tender and trusting and true 
That they may be otherwhere : 
Here one is just what one is — 
And — as for pledges to you — 
There — drink the scent of my hair : 
There— snatch your moment of bliss. 

She sings again. 

Tender — Tender — Tender, trusting and true 
That, That, That they may be, they may be other- 
where : 
Si tu veux autre chose, je n'ai rien de plus, 
Qu'est c'-Qu'est c'-Qu'est c' que tu fais dans cette 
galore ? 



162 



IN TENEBRIS 

ALL within is warm, 
/\ Here without it's very cold, 
J- ».Now the year is grown so old 
And the dead leaves swarm. 

In your heart is light, 
Here without it 's very dark, 
When shall I hear the lark ? 
When see aright ? 

Oh, for a moment's space ! 
Draw the clinging curtains wide 
Whilst I wait and yearn outside 
Let the light fall on my face. 



1.2 163 



SONG OF THE HEBREW SEER 

OH would that the darkness would cover the 
face of the land, 
Oh would that a cloud would shroud the face 
of high heaven, 
Would blot out the stars, and hush, hush, hush the 

winds of the west, 
That the sons of men might sink into utter rest, 
r"orgetting the God in whose name their fathers had 

striven 
Might strive no longer and slumber as slumbers the 
desert sand. 

That then, oh, my God, should Thy lightnings flash 

forth. 
That Thy voice, oh, Jehovah, should burst on mine 

ear 
In the thunder that rolls from the east and the north 
And thy laugh on the rushing of winds that bear 
The myriad, myriad sounds of the sea. 



164 



AN IMITATION 

(tom.m.) 

COME, my Sylvia, let us rove 
To that secret silent grove. 
Where the painted birds agree 
To tune their throats for you and me. 

We will foot it in the shade 
Of ev'ry dappled, dancing glade. 
Till Ob'ron and his fairy train 
Shall shout for joy and swear amain : 
Such form as thine was never seen 
Sporting o'er the velvet green. 



165 



SONNET 

(Suggested by the "Phcebus with Admetus" 
BY GEORGE Meredith) 

A FTER Apollo left Admetus' gate, 
/\ Did his late fellows feel a numb despair, 
1 LDid they cry " Comrade, comrade" everywhere 
Thro' the abandoned byres, and curse the fate 
That let them for awhile know him for mate 
To mourn his going ? Did his vacant chair 
Before the fire, when winter drove them there 
Make the sad silence more disconsolate ? 

Did yearning ears all vainly, vainly strain 

To half recall the voice that now was mute ? 

Did yearning eyes strive all in vain, in vain, 

To half recall the glory of his face. 

To half recall the God that for a space 

Had quickened their dead world ? and, ah, his lute . . . 



i66 



SONG DIALOGUE 

" T S it so, my dear ? " 

I "Even so!" 

1. ' ' Too much woe to bear ? " 
" Too much woe ! " 
"Wait a little while, 
We must bear the whole. 
Do not weep, but smile, 
We are near the goal." 

" Is it dark— the night ? " 
"Very dark!" 
"Not a spark of light? " 
"Not a spark!" 
"Yet a little way 
We must journey on ; 
Night will turn to day 
And the goal be won." 

" Will the dawn come soon ? " 
"In an hour; 
See ! the sinking moon 
Loses power. 
Saffron grey the west 
Wakes before the sun. 
Very soon we '11 rest 
Now that day's begun." 



167 



VI 

LITTLE PLAYS 

The following pieces in dramatic form were pub- 
lished, viz., "Perseverance d' Amour" and "The 
Face of the Night," in the volume bearing the 
latter name; the " Mother " appeared also in the 
Fortnightly Review. "King Cophetua" and the 
" Masque " were published in " Poems for Pictures." 
I have grouped them here together for the conveni- 
ence of the reader who does not like poems in dia- 
logue. 



PERSEVERANCE D'AMOUR 

A LITTLE PLAY 

Time. — Thirteenth Century. 

Place. — In and near the City of Paris. 

Persons — 

Anseau dit le Tourangeau, Jeweller to the 
King. 

TiENNETTE, Daughter of a bondman of the 
Abbey of Saint Germain. 

The Abbot of St Germain, Hugon de Sen- 
necterre. 

The King of France. 

The Queen of France. 

The King's Chamberlain. 

A Fat Burgess of Paris. 

A Thin One. 

A Stranger. 

Monks of the Abbey; a Crowd, etc., etc., 

SCENE I 

Anseau dit le Tourangeau and Tiennette, 
meeting on a road in the Clerk's Meadow. The road 
has a grassy border, vines in the background and the 
roofs of the Abbey of Saint Germain. It is a Sunday 
at sunset, the Angelus ringing. 

Anseau, a man of middle age, large, squarely built, 
richly dressed, black bearded, with a gold chain round 
his neck. Hanging from it the badge of the '■^Sub- 
jects of the King." He is a free man, and a burgess 
of the City of Paris. 

Tiennette, a young girl, fair; dressed in sack-cloth 
■with a rope girdle. She is leading a cow which 
browses in the ditch. They stand while the Angelus 
rings; then she passes Anseau without looking up; 
Anseau turns and looks after her. 

171 



A ns. A pretty pass, 

That I, a ten years' master jeweller, 
A burgess and a man of forty years 
Spent soberly in service of my craft 
Have not the courage for a mere " God-den " 
To such a petticoat 

\_He calls: ^'Flo-la" and beckons to Tiennette. She 
comes back slowly, leading the cow after her. 

A ns. Ah, sweetheart, is your state so poor a one 
That, on a Sabbath, in despite of law 
You come abroad to work. Have you no fear ? 

Tien. My lord, I have no fear ; I am below 
The notice of the laws and the Lord Abbot 
Doth give us licence thus to graze our cow 
After the hour of vespers. 

A ns. Well , my dear , 

You set the welfare of your soulless beast 
Above the welfare of your little soul ? 

Tien. Our little souls, my lord ? Our soulless beast 
Is more than half our lives and more than all 
The little souls that we have never seen. 

Ans. Why, then, you're passing poor. And yet you 
have 
Your jewels and the gold you carry with you. 
Your eyes and hair ; I would I had such gold. 
Where are your lovers ? You are near a city 
Where what you have . . . 

Tien. Nenny, my lord. I have . . . 

\She holds out her left arm and shows him, on it, a 
silver band such as is worn by grazing cattle, but 
witJiout the bell. Anseau raises his hands in 
horror. 

Ans. A chattel of the Abbey's . . . 

Tien. Ah, my lord, 

I'm daughter to the Abbey's serf Etienne. 
172 



Who marries me becomes — it makes no boot 
Though he be even burgess or more great — 
Becomes a bonded serf with me and falls 
Body and goods to the Abbey. If he love 
Withouten wedlock, then the children fall 
Again to the Abbey. . . . Were I ten times less 
Ill-favoured than I am, the most in love 
Would flee me like the plague. 

Ans. And do you say 

That not a one, for love of your blue eyes 
And of your mouth and of your little hands. 
Did ever try to buy your liberty, 
As I bought mine o' the King ? 

Tt'en. It costs too dear. 

It costs too dear, my lord. All those I please 
At meeting go away as they did come. 
It costs too dear. 

Ans. And have you never thought 
Of seeking other lands on a good horse 
Behind a rider 

Tzen. Oh, one thinks . . . one thinks . . . 
But, sir, the Abbey's arms are very long. 
They'd hang me if they caught me, and the man. 
If he were noble, he must lose his lands ; 
If simple, life and all. I am not worth 
Such stakes. Besides, I live in fear of God 
Who set me where I am. 

\_S/ie begins to drag the cow further along the road. 
Anseau stands silent. At last he says absent- 
mindedly : 

A ns. But then — your age ? 

Tien. I do not know, my lord, but the Lord Abbot, 
They say, doth keep account 

A ns. And what's your name ? 

Tien. I have no name, my lord, my father was 
Baptiz'd Etienne, and so my mother was 

173 



"The woman called Etienne," and as for me 
They call me Tiennette, but I've no name. 

Ans. {in the same tone). Your cow, now, is a noble 
beast. 

Tien. My lord, 
Her milk's the best of all the country side. 
If you do thirst. . . 

A ns. Why, no, I have no thirst 

That that could satisfy. Now listen you 

I am that Anseau called le Tourangeau, 

My fame is what it is, my work no worse. 

After my light I've lived and done my best, 

And I am wealthy past the middle wealth. 

I never followed women ; ev'ry night 

Your gallants passed my windows they have seen 

My steadfast lamp behind the iron grilles. 

Have seen me bent above the shining gold 

Or black against my forge. I once was poor. 

Now I am wealthy past the middle wealth. 

I am a man like other men, not worse 

And little better, not I think unkind 

Nor too much given to mirth. And so I've lived 

Since I could wield a chisel of mine own. 

But now — I cannot tell you when or how, 

What set me thinking, how the thought increased — 

I could not sleep at night, nor brace to work. 

It may have been a month ; I do not know. 

Till, of a sudden, as small bubbles run 

To merge into one whole, the thought was there ; 

I must be married. I must have some soul 

To share my joys with and to share my griefs, 

And bear me little children Ever since 

That thought has been all me. I was to-day 
Before the altar of Saint Eloy's church 
(The seven small gold saints and the large cross 
Set with carbuncles are my proper work), 
And prayed that he would set within my path 
»74 



A woman fitted for my prime of life. 
You see me : this is I. The air's so hot 
Within the narrow streets I came out here 
Where I have never walked this seven years. 
The little birds were singing down the sun 
The bell rang out and in the sacred minutes 
I saw you stand against me ; was it not 
An answer from the Saint ? 

Tien. Alas, if but 

The price were not so great. 
Ans. I've little skill 

In women, but there is a certain sound 
Comes from true metal ; I've a skill in that, 
And when I look at you and when you speak 
I seem to hear that sound. 

Tien. If but the price 

Were not so great. I am not worth the tenth. 

You do not know I've little skill in men. 

You frighten me a little; what know I ? 

If there is any truth for such as I 

You seem to have that truth. If any goodness 

Is in the world for me, it seems in you. 

You should be strong and gentle, I am weak. 

I do not know; I say I do not know. 

Alas, alas . . . 

[She begins to weep softly. Anseau crosses himself, 
joins his hands and says : 

Ans. I make a vow to my Lord Saint Eloy, under 
whose invocation are all master jewellers, to invent 
two shrines of gilded silver of the finest work it shall 
be granted to me to achieve.I makeavowto fill them, 
the one with a likeness of the Holy Virgin, to the end 
that if I achieve the liberty of my wife, she be glori- 
fied; the other for my patron Saint Eloy if only I 
have success in this my emprise. And I swear by my 
eternal salvation to persevere with courage in this 

'75 



affair, to spend in it all that I possess and to quit of 
it only with my life. So God help me, Anseau dit le 
Tourangeau. 

[TiENNETTE has sunk upon her knees; Anseau 
bends and raises her. The cow has moved slowly up 
the side of the ditch and is browsing on the vines. 

Tien. Alas, alas . . . 

You do not know. You must take back your vow. 
I could love you all my life. Alas, alas . . . 

Ans. The vow is said ; there is no taking back. 

Tien. You do not know, alas, you do not know 

\She runs to the cow as the scene closes. 
END OF SCENE I 



176 



SCENE II 

[Paris. A place in front of the Church of St Luke. A 
great crowd of burgesses, their wives, children, ped- 
lars, friars and pages is round the house of Maitre 
Anseau. 

A Stranger; a Fat Burgess; his Wife; a Thin 
Burgess ; his Mother. 

The Stranger, a man in parti-coloured hose, with 
one long sleeve torn and hanging by a thread, a 
peaked red beard, two peacock's feathers held by a 
brooch to a hat that has a long flap in front. He 
struggles out of the crowd and salutes the Fat Bur- 
gess, who has his wife upon his arm. 

The Stranger. Sir, I beseech you, sir, I am but very 
newly come to this town. Sir, I beseech you, tell me 
how I may come to the house of one {he reads from a 
paper) Maitre Anseau, dit le Tourangeau. 

The Fat Burgess. That, sir, is the house, of stone, 
beside the Church. But if you would come to it you 
must even fly like the birds of heaven. 

The Crowd. Maitre Anseau . . . Maitre Anseau. 

The Stranger. Sir, I am newly come to this town. 
The Lord Percy is to wed, sir, and having a mind to 
— the Lord Percy of Northumberland — present his 
transcendent bride with a jewelled stomacher, and 
hearing of the surpassing skill of this Maitre An- 
seau, sent me, sir, his gentleman, sir. . . . 

The Crowd. Maitre Anseau, Maitre An . . . seau ! 
Cracked be all shaven skulls ... we will tear down 
the Abbey . . . we will . . . 

The Stranger. And so, sir, if your master be so well 
be-customed, it beseems me, sir, to think that my 
worshipful Lord will scarce be suited, nor his tran- 
scendent bride be stomachered, this many days. 

The Crowd. Hurrah, hurrah ! Be of good cheer. For 
the glory of Paris be skulls cracked ! 

M 177 



The stranger. I have been torn as if by wild beasts. 
Behold me . . . 

The Fat Burgess. Sir, it would seem that you know 
not the lamentable story. It is in this way, sir . . . 

\His voice is lost in the noise of the crowd. He can he 
seen gesticulating. The Thin Burgess interrupts 
him. They discuss in dumb show; the wives join the 
discussion. Then a lull. 

The Fat Burgess. And so, sir, the King's Cham- 
berlain, owing to our Master great sums for a poun- 
cet-box set in onion stones . . . 

The Thin Burgess. Neighbour, you mislead. I have 
it from Maitre Anseau himself. The pouncet-box 
was paid for. It was out of the great love the Cham- 
berlain bore our master 

The Fat Burgess. Well, be it as you will, neighbour. 
For love or debt the King's Chamberlain hies him 
with Maitre Anseau to the Abbot. And the crafty 
Abbot . . . 

The Crowd. Pestilence carry off Abbot Hugon . . . 
May the plague take him off ere he take one of our 
free burgesses for a serf. 

The Fat Burgess. This crafty Abbot will not abate 
one jot; but sitteth as mum as a fox in a drain. The 
Master offereth great fortunes for this wench. But 
the Abbot will have him for a serf if he marry her, 
thinking to gain for the Abbey the incomparable 
skill of... 

The Thin Burgess. Neighbour, you mistake. It is 
a matter of principle. 

[To the Stranger). Sir, the thing is thus. This 
Abbot would enslave all us free burgesses and he 
makes with our Master a beginning. He hath other 
wenches for all us burgesses 

The Wife of the Thin Burgess. Oh, the guile, the 
guile. . . . 
178 



The Fat Burgess. Principle or no principle, the 
matter stands thus. Maitre Anseau going again to 
the Clerk's Meadow finds there no Tiennette. For, 
sir, our 'prentices having planned to carry her off in 
their despite, these wicked priests did have her 
clapped up close. Since which time our Master 
hath been suffered to see her only through a little 
grille. . . . 

The Thin Burgess. See the craft of it. This is to 
whet his appetite. 

The Fat Burgess' s Wife. Oh, sir, they say it be piti- 
ful to see them there. They do buss the bars of each 
side and the tears do run, do run like juice fi-om a 
roasting capon. A did use to be a lusty man, and now 
A's grov^n so pale, so pale 

The Fat Burgess. He eats not . . . 

The Thin Burgess. Sleeps not. 

The Fat Burgess. Does no work . . . 

The Thin Burgess. Sighs and groans. 

The Fat Burgess. Raves and swears . . . 

The Thin Burgess. And the crux of the matter is : 
to-day he shall make his final choice, whether to 
have the Tiennette and a serf's life, or leave her 
and take to . . . 

A Loud Voice. The King has gone to the Abbey 

The Crowd. Maitre Anseau. Mai . . .tre An . . . seau 

The Thin Burgess. The King, sir, doth owe our 
Master great sums and shall intercede for him 

The Fat Burgess. I do wager ten yards of white 
velvet to a bodkin he do leave her to go her way and 
he his. 

The Wife of the Thin Burgess. I do wager four- 
score and two of my fatting capons he do have her 

The Voice again. The King has gone to the Ab- 
bey 

The Crowd. Maitre Anseau . . . Maitre Anseau 

The Fat Burgess. Be it a wager . . . 

M2 179 



The Wife of the Thin Burgess. Be it a wager and 
shake hands upon it 

[^ great uproar behind ; the croivd sways backwards and 
forwards, then opens. Maitre Anseau is seen to be 
mounting a white jennet from the steps of his house. 

The Crowd. To the Abbey, to the Abbey . . . [They 
run off.) 

The Stranger. I shall be killed ; I shall be killed 

My hat is gone. 

END OF SCENE II 



1 80 



SCENE III 

\_The Great Hall in the Abhey of Saint Germain. To 
L. very large doors, opened and showing through 
their arches an apple close, red apples lying in heaps 
on the turf below whitened tree trunks. Facing the 
doors the Abbot's chair. Swallows fly in and out 
avtofig the gilded beams of the tall roof. 

The Abbot Hugon, Monks, Cross-bearer. Behind — 
The Crowd, Soldiers of the Abbey, King's Sol- 
diers ; Afterwards — Bondsmen of the Abbey. 

The Abbot Hugon, a very old man. His shaven face, 
very brown, small a?td dried, hangs forward on his 
breast, a richly few elled mitre pressing it dawn. He 
is seated in his chair facing the open doors. The 
Monks are round his chair which stands high on 
stone steps. 

The Crowd is being pressed in place at the back of the 
Hall by the Soldiers of the Abbey, who set their 
halberd staves across the faces. The King's Soldiers 
look on laughing. A great uproar. A flourish of 
trumpets sounds without; the ABBOT is assisted to 
his feet and gives the benediction towards the doors. 

Enter the King of France. He rides a black stallion 
into the hall; the Queen in a white litter borne by 
two white mules. The curtains of the litter and the 
clothes of the mules are sewn with golden fleur-de-lis, 
the mules are shod with gold. A train of lords and 
ladies follow them. The KING'S Chamberlain 
comes to stand by the head of the Kin^s horse. 

The Crowd. The King . . . the King. Do you see the 
King ? . . . Now the Queen. Ah . . . h . . . h . . . 

\The King salutes the Abbot who blesses him again. 
Their lips can be seen to move, but what they say is 
lost in the exclamations of the Crowd. . . . The King 
bends to speak to his Chamberlain, who exit. The 
Queen puts her head out of the litter. 

i8i 



The Crowd. The Queen . . . Do you see the Queen ? 
. . . Ah . . . h . . . h . . . 

\The Chamberlain returns with Anseau dit le 
TouRANGEAU, "who knccls in the space between the 
King and the Abbot. 

The Crozvd [a great cry). Ha, Maitre Anseau, 
Maitre Anseau. A free man. No serf. . . no serf. . . . 

[It grows silent. The voice of the King is heard as if 
continuing a speech. 

The King. Be of good courage, man. 

My lord the Abbot will have need of us 
Upon a day. 

The Crowd. Huzza . . . hear the King . . . the King 

The King. For in the end, we are the King of 
France. 
If what men say be true we are more poor 
Than you are. Therefore courage, man, look up. 
Set a high price and with a smiling face 
Cast down that price. Lord Abbot name it him. 
He's stores of gold, they say. Now, Master, rise. 
Stand up, man, and unpouch. Lord Abbot, name 
The lowest ransom. 

The Abbot. Sire, the price is fixt. 

The Crowd. Strangle that Abbot. Cast him down 

to us. 
The Abbot. The price is fixt. There is one only price. 
I am the servant of the Abbey's fame. 
Glory, renown and ancient heritages. 
Our statutes fix the price, I can no more. 
We live in troublous times ; the breakers roar 
Against the ship o' the Church ; the times are evil ; 
And I a feeble, poor old man who stand 
By the grace of God at the helm. What would you 

have? 
To bate one jot of our enforced rights 
182 



Were to cast down into that raging sea 
One of the sails we trust to for our voyage 
And final harbouring. The price is fixt. 

The Crowd. Let us unfix it. Cast him down to us. 

The King. You hear him, Master ? 

Ans. Oh, I hear him, sire. 

The King [to his Chamberlain). You should be 
famous to defeat the laws, 
To find out quibbles; cheat the statutes' due. 
What say you ? 

The Chamberlain. Sire, I can but what I can. 
The Abbot is too strong; 'tis manifest 
That he who's certain of the whole would be 
111 skilled at bargaining to take a part. 
The Abbot's case is that. And for the rest : 
I've argued with our Master; I have said : 
" Good Master, think, the world is very large. 
And full t'o'erflowing of dames passing fair." 
I've told him that the tenth part of his goods 
Would purchase him the name of nobleman. 
Another tenth a lady to his bed. 
The noblest and the fairest in the land. 
What would you have ? The man is made of iron 
And will not bend ; the Abbot will not break. 
And I have wasted breath. 

The King. Good madam Queen, 

Entreat my lord the Abbot for these lovers. 

The Queen. My lord, I've done a many things for 
you. 
Have broidered copes, have made my ladies sew. 
Your altar cloths with pearls. Beseech you now 
Have pity on these lovers. 

The A bbot. Oh, fair Queen, 

In that I am a man I pity them. 
In that I am God's servant I must shut 
My eyes, my ears, my heart. Since there have been 
An abbey in this place, and monks and bondsmen — 

183 



As who should say : Through all the mists of 

time. 
It hath not been decreed that there should fall 
A burgess of the city to the Abbey. 
If now this precedent should be despised 
There would not . . . 

The Queen. Oh, a truce to precedent. 

What is this wench ? A girl who leads a cow ; 
In sackcloth. Doth the honour of the Abbey 
Depend on girls in sackcloth ? 

The A hbot. Oh, fair Queen , 

The precedent . . . 

The Queen. Depends on girls in sackcloth ! 
Good, my lord Abbot, I had thought you wise, 
Old learned Churchmen had had better wits. 
What you ? a man of three-and-ninety years 
Who by the very nature of your vows 
Are closured out from love ... to say a wench 
That leads a cow is necessary to 
The honour of your Abbey 

The Abbot. Lady Queen, 
I am an old man; doting I do say : 
This wench that leads a cow is necessary 
To the honour of our Abbey 

The King. Gentle wife. 

You have the Abbot on the hip, but sweet, 
A-meanwhiles our good Master kneels on thorns. 
Lord Abbot, make an end; produce this wench, 
This Helen that doth rive our world in twain, 
And let our Master make his utter choice. 

\At a sign from ABBOT HUGON, four -and- twenty 
acolytes issue out from behind the chair. They strew 
■white rose petals upon the steps until it is like a hill 
of snow. £«/£r TiENNETTE. 

The Crowd. Ah . . . h . . . h . . . 
184 



[TiENNETTE is dressed like a maiden-queen in white, 
with a white coif sewn 2vith gold, with a girdle of 
silver filigree, with white gloves embroidered with 
pearls. The ABBOT HUGON beckons to her to mount 
the steps to him. She does so. 

The King [to Maitre Anseau). Nay, man, hadst 
well be wealthier than we 
To set a price on her that led your cow. 

[To the Abbot.'] If you will do us favour in this thing. 
We shall requite you. We are France and Paris. . . . 

The Crowd. Paris and France ! . . . 

The King. And France and Paris have been 
touched home 
By fortunes of these lovers Hear us roar ! . . . 

The Crowd. Paris and France ! 

The Abbot. Ah, sire, what would you do ? 
You touch yourself by melling in this thing. 
If we should blench to this unquiet mob 
They would gain strength from broken precedent 
Which is a dyke against this hungry sea 
Wherein a breach being made, the sea sweeps in 
And overwhelms us . . . overwhelms all France, 
The Abbey and the Court 

The Crowd. Paris and France. 

The King {to them). Nenny, ye lend the Abbot 
similes 
That are not pleasant savoured. Master speak 

[Maitre AnseAU has risen to his feet and advances 
towards the Abbot holding out his arms. 

The Queen {to her ladies). She's fair; why, yes, 
I think she's fair to see. 
She halts a little. But she's fair, she's fair. 

Ans. Oh, Father Abbot, oh, you man of God, 
If you have any pity in your heart, 
If you have any hope of rest to come, 

185 



Bethink you, oh, bethink you. It grows late, 

You stand upon the very verge of the shade 

Death casts upon us. I do know the law 

And I have made a vow. But, man of God, 

The thing is in your hands. For me remains 

No choice. The verdict lies with you. For me . . . 

I have been poor, and I have been a bondsman. 

And I am patient, oh ! and I can bear. 

But oh, you man of God, take heed, take heed. 

If you have ever seen a little child, 

And if your frozen eyes have thawed to see 

The sunlight on the little children's faces. 

Bethink you of the curse you cast upon 

The children that that maid shall bear to me. 

I have no choice, I have made the vow to God 

And I fulfil it. But the little children . . . 

Have you the heart to let them live that life, 

Un-named, unknown, to live and die as beasts 

That perish ; all those tender little things 

That God doth mean should burgeon in the light 

And with their little laughter sing his praise. 

The Abbot. I am a very ancient man, and stand 
Within the shadow, and I stand and say : 
The price is fixt. 

Ans. Accursed rat o' the Church, 

The price is fixt ... is fixt. Oh, horrible. 
Insensate thirst for gold. Then, oh, thou man. 
Thou spider gorging on the brink of hell. 
Suck up my gold, my life. But oh, I keep 
The better part of me, you cannot touch 
The subtle engine God hath pleased to fix 
Within my brain, you cannot use the skill 
That made me what I am. And that I swear 
Not torture, not the rack, not death itself 
Shall set in motion. All your Abbey's rents 
For twice a hundred years could never pay 
What it shall lose thereby. I am more strong 
i86 



Than iron's hard, and the more long-suffering 
Than grief is great. For you I might have been 
A fashioner of things divine ; for you 
I shall be but a pack-horse. 

[TiENNETTE, who had covered her face with her arms, 
stretches out her arms to Anseau. 

Tten. Oh, my love, 

My lord, my more than life, thou noble man. 
Forsake me, oh, forsake me, I did say 
" You did not know," and, oh you did not know. 
When you did make your vow. Forsake me, then, 
And go your ways 

Ans. I cannot go my way; 

I have no way but only this with you. 

Tien. There is a way that God hath shown to me — 
These last few weeks they have been schooling me 
Within their cloisters — and there is a way, 
By which, if you do love me more than all, 
You shall enjoy me and go free in the end. 
For this the law is — they have told me so — 
If I should die before a child is born. 
You should go free though losing house and store. 
The occasion of your serfdom being dead. 
And oh, my lord and life. 
You shall. But for my sin of laying hands 
Upon myself, full surely the Lord God 
Shall pardon me, full surely the Lord God 
Shall pardon who doth know and weigh all hearts. 

\The Abbot lays his hand upon her arm. 

The Crowd. You shall not hurt her ; we will have 
you down. 
Old Spider . . . Rat o' the Church. 

The King. Ah, make an end, 

Lord Abbot, for our dames have eyes all wet. 
The Abbot. The price is fixt. 

187 



A lis. And I must pay the price. 

The Crowd. You shall not ; no, you shall not. We 
are the free burgesses of Paris. 

\_The Abbot Hugon beckons Maitre Anseau to come 
tip to him. He slowly ascends the steps. The thurifers 
drazv round and a clotid of incense goes up. The 
Monks chant and the King removes his heaver. The 
Queen and her ladies cross themselves. 

A great uproar in the hall; the Soldiers of the Abbey 
are thrown dotvn and the Crowd Ireaks through; the 
King's Soldiers force it back. The sound of hells 
comes in from, zvithout. Enter the Bondsmen of the 
Abbey bearing a canopy. The Abbot is seen blessing 
Anseau and Tiennette. Afterwards they go down 
the steps together. A Monk beckons them to stand 
beneath the canopy, -which has gold staves with little 
silver bells. During this wedding there has been a 
constant clamour. Now it falls silent. 

The Abbot. Anseau, thou serf and bondsman of our 
Abbey, 
Acknowledge that thy goods and life are ours. 

Ans. I do acknowledge it. 

The Abbot {to the Bondsmen). Bare ye his arm. 
Up to the elbow. Armourer, set thou on 
This bondsman's wrist the shackle of his state. 

[ The Armourer rivets a silver collar upon the arm of 
Anseau. Whilst he is doing it the Abbot descends 
the steps and comes to them. 
The Abbot. My hands are very feeble, I am old. 
{To Tiennetteyj Give me some help, thou wife of 
the new bondsman. 

[77^^ Abbot Hugon undoes the collar from the arm 
of Anseau. 
i88 



The Crowd. Ah . . . h . . . h . . . What is this ? What is 
this? 
The Abbot {to Mattre Anscau). Thou art a master 

jeweller. Hast skill 
To break the collar from thy new wife's arm 
And not to hurt her ? 

[Anseau stands as if amazed. The Abbot frees 

TiENNETTE. 

Lo, thou burgess's wife, 
How is it, to be free ? 

The Crowd. What ? . . . what . . . What is this ? . . . Are 
they fi-ee ? 

[As the curtain falls Anseau and TiENNETTE stand 
as if amazed. The monks raise their hands in horror. 

END OF SCENE III 



[89 



THE AFTER SCENE 

[The Chamber of the Abbot. A hare, small, ■white- 
washed room. On the floor, in a broad ray of sunlight 
that falls from the barred windows, stand two great 
gilt shrines. The door of the one is closed; through 
the half-opened doors of the other one sees an image 
of the Virgin in the likeness of TiENNETTE having 
a little child upon her arm and a cow kneeling at her 
feet. 

7%e Abbot; Two Religious. 

The Abbot lies with his eyes closed upon a narrow 
pallet, a black rosary falling from his clasped hands. 
The Two Religious stand motionless, their heads 
covered by their cowls, at his feet. 
A long silence in which is heard the cooing of a blue 
pigeon on the windozv-sill. The Abbot opens his eyes. 

The Abbot. So ye are there ; I sent for you. The end 
Is very near me now. 

[He makes a weak gesture with one hand as if pointing 
to the shrines. 

You see those things ? 
What say you, brothers, did I dote ? I know, 
I say I know, have known this many months 
What you have whispered in the refectory. 
"The Abbot dotes," you said, " The Abbot dotes" . . . 
You said I doted; that my heart was touched 
By whimperings of lovers. One of you 
Shall step into my shoes a short day hence. 
Oh, let your dotage work as well as mine 
For honour of the Abbey ; do but once 
One-half of what I did in this one thing ! 
You said I doted, that my heart was touched. 
Nenny, I have a heart, but I am old 
And very cunning. I have seen more things 
Than most. And I do know my world, I say. 
190 



You would have kept him, you. My heart was 

touched, 
In happy hour, I say, my heart was touched. 
Mine that has nursed the Abbey's honour here 
As mothers nurse their babes. You would have held 
The letter of the law and raised a storm. 
That had cast down our house. . . . The burgesses 
Do love us now; this twelvemonth they have brought 
More offerings than in a lustre past. 
You would have kept the law and raised a storm 
That must have shorn us of one-half the rights 
We have upon the city. I did know 
That, in the acclamations of my mercy 
The collar I have set upon their necks 
Would gall no withers, yet the precedent 
Be riveted. And there is more than this 
I gained whose heart was touched by lovers' tears. 
It brought us these two shrines. I tell you, men, 
I prophesy who lie at the point of death. 
That when all precedents are swept away, 
And you and I and all of us become 
A little dust that would not fill a cup, 
These shrines shall be the glory of the Abbey, 
Its chiefest profit and most high renown. 
For men shall marvel at the handiwork, 
And women tell the story at their work, 
And crossed lovers come from all the lands 
To make their offerings and shed salt tears 
Unto the saints that let their hearts be moved 
By these two lovers of the time before. 

I prophesy. 
Upon the point of death, I know my world, 
I have been in it for a mort of years. . . . 
And one of you shall step into my shoes. 
You stand there thinking it; I know my world. 
[He closes hts eyes, then opens them and looks at the 
image of the Virgin. 

191 



Oh, blessed child upon thy mother's arm, 

Remember when our Brotherhood is tried 

{To the Religious.) Go, get ye to your whisperings 

again 
And say I doted 

Brothers, go with God. 
Send me a little wine and let me sleep. 

[He closes his eyes again. Exeunt the Religious. The 
blue pigeon flies from the window-sill. Its wings 
clatter in the stillness. 



192 



KING COPHETUA'S WOOING 

A SONG DRAMA IN ONE ACT 

Dramatis Personcz 
COPHETUA, King. 

Christine, A Beggar Maid. 

(Scene discovers CoPHETUA, dressed as a beggar, seated 
beneath a thorn on a hillside. In the distance, a road 
running down to the sea; at tts verge a small chapel. 
A n early morning in May.) 

COPHETUA. 

COULD I but keep my beggar's staff, 
And change my cares for my beggar's laugh, 
And keep my gown with its sleeve and a half, 
And just lay down my orb and crown, 
I think my heart would weigh more light. 
And I should sleep more sound at night. 
But the day's come round, and sweet Christine 
Must doff her robe of faded green 
And know herself for a burdened Queen. 

(To him enters the Beggar Maid.) 

Beggar Maid. 

Here am I in my bridal attire ; 

I sat all night by the fire 

And stitched in the sheltered byre, 

And the sun is so bright 

And my heart is so light 

It hasn't a care, and it's all your own. 

It's yours, just yours, and yours alone. 

N 193 



COPHETUA. 

Last night I dreamt a weary thing, 
That you were you and I the King, 
With a heart so sad I could not sing. 
And I came pricking along the way 
And you sat here beneath the may. 



Christine. 

Lay off your dreams, the church bell rings, 
And were you ten times king of kings. 
And ten times Kaiser, you could be 
No more a king than you're king of me. 

COPHETUA. 

If I were King and made you Queen ? 

Christine. 

And were I that, would the green-wood sheen 
Be a whit less glad or the gay green sward 
Less dear were you King and Over-lord ? 
Would you love me less ? I trow not so. 

I saw the King a while ago 
Go pricking by with his haughty crew 
While I sat here in the morning dew 
Before I ever thought of you. 

He cast me this rose noble. See ! 

And I thought, " This shall be my wedding fee 

To the man I love and the man I wed." 

(I've thought when I looked at the good King's head 
That the noble bears, that he favours you 
In the nose and the mouth and the forehead too.) 
194 



COPHETUA. 
But if I made you Queen . . . 

Christine. 

What yet 
I' the track o' dreams, see ! I will set 
My hawthorn crown upon your brow ; 
The dew hangs on it even now. 
And where is there a fairer gem 
Set in a fair queen's diadem 
Than this one lustrous drop ? 

COPHETUA. 

Christine, 
What if I made you such a Queen ? 
There is a cloud doth dimn my mind 
But if.... 

Christine. 

Oh, love . . . 

The bell sounds down the wind. 
The priest will soon pass down the hill. 
And we're to wed, and you are dreaming still. 

COPHETUA {speaking after a long pause). 

I love your face, I love your hands, your eyes 
Are pools of rest for mine. I love your feet, 
Your little shoes, the patches in your gown . . . 

Christine. 
I know your tongue now . . . 

COPHETUA. 

If I make you Queen . . . 

N2 195 



Christine. 

I would all " ifs " were sunk beneath the sea — 
There is a proverb ties them to us beggars — 
And make, why make, not made ? 

COPHETUA. 

It was a thought, 
A passing cloud — the shadow of a dream. 

Christine. 

Ah, love, no more of dreams, they frighten me. 
The sun is up, look at the streak of sea 
Between the hills. And love — no more of dreams. 
The larks thrill all above the downs with songs 
To shatter dreams. And there's a song about it : 

{singing) 

" If you and I were King and Queen," 

I'll sing it if you'll join me in the lilt ; 

I'd rather sing than dream the time away. 

(she sings) 
If you and I were King and Queen 

(a silence) 
Now join me if you love me, dream if not. 

{she sings again) 

She. If you and I were King and Queen — 

He. Sweet Christine — 

She. Would you come courting me ? 

He. You should see. 

She. Would a crown spoil my face, 
Or a throne mar my grace ? 
Would you keep me the same high place in your 

heart? 
196 



Must we still part to meet, should we still meet to 

part, 
If we were King and Queen ? 

Together. Ah then ! ah then ! 
How should we fare with our cates rich and rare, 
We beggars, we lovers of roadsides, we rovers 
Of woodlands and townlands and dalelands and 

downlands ? 
We lovers . . . 

(COPHETUA is silent and the song ceases.) 

Christine. 

I think you do not love me any more, 
Now you forget my songs. 

COPHETUA. 

I cannot think of songs, nor hear the lark, 
Nor feel the glad spring weather. In my ears 
Is nothing but the tramping of the hoofs, 
And in my eyes the flash of swords and silks 
Of a proud cavalcade that comes anow 
To bear us hence. 

Christine. 

Oh, God, your mind is sprung, 

Your thoughts, gone wand'ring into other fields, 

Have left poor me in mine. 

COPHETUA. 

Not so, not so; 
My mind's come back from long sweet sojournings 
In a free land of hill and down and sea. 
To a sad world of walled towns and courts 
And carks and cares. 

Christine. 

No, no, the sun's there yet. 

197 



COPHETUA. 

He shines no more on me — no more on me, 
I am a King again — a King — and you 
Must either leave the life you love, to lead 
With me the life I loathe, or let me live 
Alone, unaided, all alone and sad, 
The life that leads a King. 

Christine. 

There is a weary horror in your eyes. 

And I must needs believe you. I'm a beggar, 

So were my sire before me and his sires, 

For generations and for ages past 

We've lived free lives and breathed the good free air 

You came among us in a free man's guise 

And wooed me — wooed me — and I gave my heart 

To you a freeman. 

COPHETUA. 

Oh — a weary King . . . 

For a short breathing space I doffed my crown. 

Laid down my cares and walked without a load. 

The task remains myself did set myself 

Duly to reign, to shape a people's ends. 

As I deem just. Here have I neither end 

Of travel, nor an aim for life to hit, 

Or miss i' the shooting. 

Christine. 
Could we not live free ? 

COPHETUA. 

Not free, not free, my task would call me back. 
It calls me now. It calls me, calls me now. 
198 



Christine. 
Is this all true, no summer morning's dream ? 
Oh, here is then that parting of the ways 
I dreamt of yesternight. 

COPHETUA. 

There lie the roads, 
Here travel I. 

Christine. 

And I must choose, must choose 
Between my love and life, the old free life. 

Then choose I this, in good or evil weather. 
Up hill or down, on moorland and in fen. 
On white sea sand or 'mid the purple heather. 
To travel on with you, and where or when 
The mists o'erwhelm us, meet them, and together 
Uphold with you the burden and the pain. 

Oh, all the love I bore you and still bear you 
Make light our feet, and temper time and tide. 
And each day's setting out shall find me near you, 
And each day's close shall find me at your side. 

(A long pause. At last) 

Christine. 
And it was you rode by upon the horse ? 

Cophetua. 

And you it was sat there upon a stone — 

But hark, ah hark, there wind the distant horns. 

They come, they come, the old free life is passing. 

Christine. 

Oh, hide me from their eyes, such cruel eyes 
They had that rode with you that day of days. 

199 



COPHETUA. 

Those are the eyes must look upon us now 
For ever and for ever till the end. 

Christine. 
The horns, the horns, the old free life is passing. 

COPHETUA. 

Oh, yonder, there's the glimpse of sun on steel, 
And there's my oriflamme. And there, 
Beyond the chapel, is another band 
Comes trooping from the ships. 

Christine. 

They come, they come, 
The old free life is passing. 

COPHETUA. 

It is past, 

The bell has ceased to toll. 

Christine. 

Oh, let us wait, 

I could not bear their eyes. Oh, clasp me round. 

And let me die to-day. 

COPHETUA. 

You must be bold, 

And there, before the altar, shame them all. 

Christine. 

Ah, there, betore the altar, I'll be proud. 
And show them all a brow serene and clear 
For love of you. But now I'm what I am. 
And needs must tremble for the time to come. 
200 



COPHETUA. 

The horns have played their last and we must go. 

Christine. 

You know the old lament they sing at sea 
When the last rope's cast off. My dear dead father 
Would have us sing it just before he died. 
We'll never sing again, for brooding hearts 
Cry, " Silent, voices, hush," and now we sail, 
And sing to drown our thoughts and singing, die. 
So now set sail, set sail. Loose the last rope 
That binds us to the past. 

[As they go, she sings " The Farewell of those that go 
away in ships.") 

(Christine sings) 

Fare thee well, land o' home 
(Oh, the sea, the sea's a foam) 
Fare thee well, land o' home. 

Blue and low. 
Fare thee well, house o' home, where the mellow 

wall-fruits grow, 
Old fields, fields o' home, where the yellow paigles 

glow. 
Fare thee well, land o' home. 
Blue and low. 

Fare thee well, pleasant land 
(Ah the foam beats on the strand) 
Fare thee well, my forbear's land 

Blue and low. 
Fare thee well, mother mine, with the pure pale brow, 
Fare ye well, quiet graves, fare ye well who rest below. 
Fare thee well, land o' home. 
Over miles and miles of foam, 
Fare thee well, land o' home. 

Blue and low. 

20 1 



"THE MOTHER" 

A SONG^RAMA 
Characters 
The Spirit of the Age. 
The Mother. 

The Little Blades of Grass. 
The Little Grains of Sand and of Dust. 

Scene. — Just outside a great city. Battalions of 
staring, dun-coloured, brick houses, newly finished, 
with "vacant windows, bluish slate roofs and yellow 
chimney pots, march on the fields which are blackened 
and shrouded with fog. hinumerahle li7ies of railway 
disappear among them, gleatning in parallel curves. 
Fog signals sound and three trains pass on different 
levels; the lights in their windows an orange blur. A 
continuous hooting of railway engines. The Spirit 
OF the Age, leaning on the brick parapet of the 
upper embankment, speaks towards The MOTHER, who 
ts unseen in the fog above the fields. 

The Spirit of the Age. 

IT'S I have conquered you. 
It is over and done with your green and over and 
done with your blue. 
Conquered you. Where is your sky ? 
Where is the green that your gown had of late? 

The Mother. 
Wait. 

The Spirit of the Age. 
I have trampled you down, you must die. 
It is only begun 
Yet it's over and done 
With the green of your grass and the blue of your sky. 
Even your great constellations 
Blaze vainly, are hid by the dun 

Of the smoke of my fires 

202 



The Mother. 
I wait; I have patience. 

The Spirit of the Age. 
The smoke of my fires, 
The dun of the lives and desires 
Of the millions and millions who live 

And who strive. 
Only to trample you down, blot you out, foul your 
face and forget. 

The Mother. 
Ah, and yet. 
\The fog to the north lifts a little and discloses clouds 
of smoke like a pall above a forest of chimney stacks ; 
a square Board School playground where children 
are running through puddles on the wet asphalt. 

The Spirit of the Age. 
And behold, they are toiling and moiling 
And soiling 
Your winds and your rains ; yea, and hark to the 
noise 

Of the girls and the boys 
Of untold generations. 

The Mother. 
I wait. I have patience. 

The Spirit of the Age. 
They play in the waters 
I grant them, the daughters 
Of fog-dripped smut-showers. 
Would they thank you for flowers 
Or know how to play by your Ocean's blown billows ? 
Who never met you. 
Whose sires forget you. 
These nations and nations 
Who never saw sea nor the riverside willows. 

203 



The Mother. 
I wait; I have patience. 

The Spirit of the Age. 

Old Silence, wait ; old Sleeper, use your patience. 
You are dead and forgotten 
As a corpse that was rotten 
A twelvemonth and more ; 
As dead as the Empires of yore. 
As dead and forgotten. 

The Little Blades of Grass {whispering). 
Listen, listen. 

The Little Grains of Sand [whispering]. 

Ah, we hear; you'll see us glisten 
When the Wind shall set us whirling. 

The Spirit of the Age. 

I am here and I shall stay 

To the utter, utter day; 

Tell me, you who've lived for ever, 

Saw you ever such a fever, 

Such a madness of gold-getting. 

Such forgetting 

Of the Thing that you called Truth — 

Such contempt, such lack of ruth, 

For your leisure and your dalliance, 

As since Time and I joined alliance ? 

I shall rule and falter never. 

You are dead and gone for ever. 

[He pauses. TliE Mother says nothing.) 
The Little Blades of Grass (whispering). 
Are you there, O all ye others ? 
204 



The Little Grains of Sand. 
We are here, O little brothers. 

The Spirit of the Age. 

Old Silence, speak ! 

I had not thought to find you half so weak 

In argument. Acknowledge I am he 

That ever more shall be. 

Be just ; confess that I have won 

And that your race is run. 

\She still keeps silence. He goes on, excitedly. 

D'you think that I am frightened by your fools 
Who with their rules 
And rusty saws from musty stools 
In dusty schools. 

Squeak. "In the very nature of the case, 
Unless the sequence of the immobile earth 
Shall change, the sun and tides stand still and all 
The vast phenomena of peoples, kings. 
And mighty Empires be for you reversed. 
That day must come when your world-sway de- 
clines"? 

The Little Blades of Grass. 

Hearken, hearken : 
Brothers, are ye there ? 

The Little Grains of Sand. 

Brothers, when that wind blows we shall darken 
All the air. 

The Spirit of the Age. 

I heard another fool with : " Time shall come 
When the tired human brain, 
That now already reels, 

205 



Shall utterly refuse to face again 

The turmoil and the hum 

Of all these wheels and wheels and wheels and wheels 

and wheels, 
This clattering of feet 
And hurrying no-whither ; deem it sweet 
To lie among the grasses, 
Where no more shadow is than of the cloud that 

passes 
Beneath the sun." Another squeaked of strife; 
Of cataclysms, plagues; and slackening grip on life, 
And pictured for us street on street on street 
Re-echoing to the feet 
Of one sole, panic-stricken passenger; 
Pictured ray houses roofless to the air. 
The windows glassless, doors with ruined locks, 
The owlet and the fox 
Sole harbourers there ; 

The only sounds hawks' screaming, plover's shriek 
Above the misted swamps ; the rivers burst 
Their banks and sweep, athirst, 

My rotting city Horrid ! . . . Mother, speak; 

Speak, mother, speak, who are so old and wise. 

The Little Blades of Grass [tittering. 
Ho, ho ! ho, ho ! 
The braggart groweth tremulous. 

The Little Grains of Sand and of Dust. 
Hallo! hallo— o—o! 
He is afraid of us. 

The Spirit of the Age. 
D'you think that I am frighted by these lies ? 
Old Dotard, I . . . 
I rule ; am come to stay 
For ever and a day. 
Behold, 

Where all my million lieges toil for grime and gold. 
206 



\The fog lifts suddenly. Against a shaft of pale, golden 
sky, one sees the immense City like a watery-edged 
silhouette. A great central dome, the outlines wet and 
gilded by the rays of light; warehouses like black iron 
cliffs, square along a river; black barges, with pale 
lights at the bows, creeping down the glassy yellow 
water; forests of chimney stacks and of masts of 
shipping. 

Answer, old witch; old silent envier of my joy, 
I challenge you, old Hecate. 

The Mother [very softly). 
Where is Troy? 

The Spirit of the Age. 
What's Troy compared to me ? 

The Mother. 
Where Carthage, Nineve, 

Where Greece, where Egypt, where are all that host 
Whose very names are lost ? 

The Little Blades of Grass {jvhispering). 
When we crave them. 
Then we have them. 

The L ittle Grains of Sand and of Dust. 
When the winds blow we o'er-ride them. 
And we hide them 
Silently. 

The Spirit of the Age. 
What were they all — all of them measured by me ? 
For never among the Nations 
And never between the Oceans, 
Were known such emanations 
Of tense, strung-nerved emotions, 
Such strivings, 
Never such hivings 
Of humans., , 

207 



The Mother. 
Son, those cities of the plain and of the shore! 
My winds blew and their fleets were shattered, 

My waves raged their harbours a-choke ; 
A very little their strivings mattered, 

Little their tenseness; their hivings broke 
For evermore. 

Little one, I who am young, furnished them graves 
and I sung 

Dirges above them. You have your millions. 

Men of all nations, I have my billions and billions 
and billions. 

Of those who are stronger than men; whose persis- 
tence. 

Whose creeping on sods, and flight down the winds 
evades the last watch, overpowers the hopeless 
resistance. 

The Little Blades of Grass. 

Hearken, hearken : 
Brothers, are ye there ? 

The Little Grains of Sand and of Dust. 

Brothers, when that wind blows we shall darken 
All the air. 

The Mother. 

Son : when I turn in my slumber, 
Your cities withouten number 

Shall fall There shall remain upon the ground 

Rubble and rubbish; a rising and settling of dust all 
round. 

Here and there a mound 

208 



And the grass will come a-creeping. 
And the sands come sifting, sweeping, 
Down the winds and up the current. 
Dry and dead and curst, abhorrent. 
Grass for the cities of the plains and of the hills; sand 
and bitter dust for the cities of the shore. 

Little one, I who am old, hid all those strivings of 

yore, 
Little one, T old and grey. 
Bid you play. 

Wrestle and worry and play in the folds of my dress. 
Till you tire, and the fire of your passions fails in 

your earth-weariness. 
Little one, I who am kind, give you time till you tire 

of your play. 
Time till you weary and say: 
" Hold; enough of our making-believe. 
Ah, children, leave striving and leave 
The little small things that we deemed 
Above price ; all the playthings that seemed 
Worth a world of contriving and strife." 
When the glimmer of gold loses life 
And its weight groweth deader and deader. 
And no one shall crave to be leader, 
O'ermasterer, lord of the knife. 

Little one, I who am wise, bid you go back to your 

play. 
Play the swift game thro' the day. 
When even comes you shall kneel down and pray. 
And, well-content, at last lay down your head 
Upon my ultimate bed 
And lose the tenseness of your futile quest 
In me who offer rest. 



209 



[The fog sweeps down : the city disappears. The Spirit 
of the Age says in a low voice) 

Poor wand'ring proser, 

Poor worn-out, mutt'ring dozer, 

With your old saws 

Of sempiternal laws, 

The day's to me not you . . . 

Strike down the old ; cry onwards to the new. 

\A train rumbles slowly past, going cautiously through 
the yellow fog. 

The Little Blades of Grass {^whispering]. 

Hearken, hearken : 
Brothers, are ye there ? 

The Little Grains of Sand and of Dust [whispering 
back). 

Brothers, when that wind blows we shall darken 
All the air. 

Curtain. 



210 



THE FACE OF THE NIGHT 

A PASTORAL 

The men of Gnossos have a legend that a man lying all night in 
the marshes near that town may see a face looking down upon him 
out of the sky. Such a man shall ever after be consumed with a 
longing to see again that face. In pursuit of it he shall abandon 
his home, his flocks and his duty to the State. And such men are 
accounted blasphemers because they infect others with this fever 
and are harmful to the republic. 

\_A wide, stony plain, the bed of a river, but dry and 
brown because it is the heart of summer. Towards sun- 
set. In the distance against the sky there rise the columns 
of a deserted temple and of poplar trees with, at their 
bases, a tangle of rosebushes and of underwood among 
fallen stones. To the right, far off, is a rocky bluff, 
purple against the evening: at its foot, very clear and 
small, are large fallen rocks round a green pool and 
spreading and shadowy trees. Small fires glimmer here. 
To the left the plain opens out towards the horizon, 
wide, suave and level; at the verge is a shimmer of the 
broad curve of the river. 

In the foreground a young man lies upon two fleeces. 
A fillet has fallen from his hair, his limbs are a golden 
brown, he has a leopard skin about his loins. His hands 
are clasped behind his head, he looks up into the western 
sky, his eye searching for the first planet to shine. Over 
the plain from the sunset and from- the sheepfolds in 
the shadow of the bluff, young girls and shepherds come 
towards him in knots. Some play upon pipes, others cry 
out from band to band, a horn sounds faintly withia 
guttural intonation. A dog's bark winds sharply from 
a distance, and there is a continual drone of gnats in 
the still air. 

The Young Man {listlessly). 

I HAVE seen the Night with her hair gemm'd with 
stars, 
With her smile the Milky Way, and her locks the 
darker bars 
Of the heavens. . . . 

02 211 



The Shepherds and the Young Girls. 

Oh, come away, 
For Lalage is thine. 



I have seen her. 



He. 
With her pale face of stars 



They. 

Rise! The shine 
Of the owl-light's on the pools, 
And the hinds bring skins of wine, 
And the hot day cools 
To its close. 

[ The drone of the pipes and the quivering of strings 
still sound as others come across the plain. They 
come closer, and, standing round, obscure the sky 
from him. 

He {rising on one elbow). 

Ah! still your pipes, still the cyther 
string that jars. 
For I have seen the Night with her face of stars. 

The Men. 

Rise up and quit these places, for in shadows Lalage 
Awaits thee. 

The Girls. 

Quit your fleeces, for in the shadows we 
In the light of nuptial torches where the poplars bar 

the sky. 
Thro' the rocks around the pool, thro' the hyacinths 

shall . . . 

212 



He. 

I, 

I have seen, have seen. . . . 

An Old Man (hastening upon thevi). 

Why never, 
Quit these places full of fever. 

He. 

I saw a face look downwards 
Thro' the stars. 

Old Man. 
No, never, never. 

He. 
I did see . . . 

Old Man [seeking to drown his voice). 
Mists from the river. 

A Young Girl's Voice {she sings as she comes along). 
When he comes from seawards, 
When he comes from townwards. 
My love sings to me words 
That my heart likes well. 

The Men {to him). 

We will bear thee on our shoulders 
Through the covert-sides and boulders 
With thy fleeces for a litter. 

The Girls. 

Unto where the watch-fires glitter 
On our shoulders we will bear thee 
To where Lalage shall rear thee 
'Twixt her breasts. 

213 



He. 

A face looked downwards, 
And I thirst, I thirst, am thirsting. 

The Old Man («'« a threatening whisper). 

Close thy lips on this for ever. 
This is blasphemy. 'Twould sever 
Life and love and earth from gladness. 
Close thy lips. I know this madness. 
I am ancient. 

He. 
I am thirsting. 

A Young Man. 

Thy Lalag^'s eyes are pools of rest, 
Thy Lalag^'s lips are sweet warm grapes 
I would it were mine to taste and taste. 

A Young Girl. 
And thy Lalage's heart is bursting. 

The Young Man. 

I would it were mine to sink and sink 

Between her breasts like hills of wine. 

I would it were mine 

To taste her lips , 

And to clasp her hips and to clasp her waist, 

And to drink her breath and to be the first 

To... 

He. 
Thirst. I thirst. 

Two Girls i^ith horns slung from their shoulders). 
Here is milk. Here wine. 
"4 



He. 

Begone and send me that wind to drink 
That cools its flood on the glacier's brink, 
Send me that wind. 

The Old Man {persuasively). 

Thy Lalag6 is grown kind: 
Sighs fill the air near her, and from her eyes, 
Where low she lies upon the filmy fleeces, 
Bright tears down fall into the milk-white creases. 
And warm, dark valleys of her snowy kirtle. 
And loosely tied her girdle. . . . 

A Hnro {running in on them). 

Thy white ewe hath burst her hurdle. 
Thy grey bitch hath tree'd a leopard, 
Shepherd, shepherd. 
Thy black heifer's milk doth curdle. 

He {jaith aweary and passionate gesture of disgust). 
I am sick of sheep and shepherds. 

The Men. 

Thou hast led us in the wars ! 

The GmLS. 

And the fairest of us maidens opens out to you her 

arms. 
Round her feet the grasses whisper, round her head 

the firefly swarms 
Form a beacon, you shall harbour in her soft, warm 

arms. 

He. 

I did see a face with for hair the darker bars 
Of the heavens. . . . 

215 



The Girls [seeking to drown his voice). 

We'll go dancing where the torchlights meet 
With the lances of the starlight and the grove is 

shadowiest, 
Showing here a foam-white shoulder, white-waved 

arm and red lit breast. 
As the harebells brush our ankles till our loves caress 

our feet, 
Burnt-out torches, rustling silence, and the night 

wind's faint and fleet. 



He {turning upon his elbow towards the men). 

I shall lead you with your lances when you face the 

menof Hather? 
I must voice you in the counsels of the aged king, my 

father? 
I shall lead the ships to seawards, I must guard the 

flocks from townwards? 



[To the girls.) 

I must bed your fairest maidens that the rest may 
dance in cadence ? 

So that wine may flow in plenty, so your loves and 
you content ye. 

Whilst with chitons loose on shoulders in the twi- 
light of the boulders. 

And in secret dells 

Ye wantons ! I have seen a face look downwards, 

Pure and passionless and distant where with stars 
the pure sky teemeth. 

The Old Man. 

He blasphemeth, he blasphemeth. 
216 



He. 

I am sick of vine-wreathed barrels, 
Sick of lances, arrows, quarrels, 
Sick of tracking in the dew. 

Of their limbs, and breasts, and you 

I have seen that face effaces, 
I have thought the utter thought. 

[He rises to his feet. 
I go to seek in desert places. 

[ Whilst he speaks the men heave up stones to throw at 
him. The girls shake their hands and cry out. He 
silences them,shaking his fist. The Old Man runs 
about behind whispering to one and another. 

[To the Girls.) 

All your sun-tanned arms are nought. 
All their lances and your dances. 

Nought and nought And I must wander 

Past the mountains of Iskander, 

Past the salt-glazed lakes of Meine, 

Past Pahan mist- veiled and rainy. 

Whither ? Whither ? Ah, my Fortune ? 

Seeking her, I must importune 

All the icy ghosts of souls 

That died of frost, and all the ghouls 

That feed in battle-clouds. 

The fiery spirits in the shrouds 

Above volcanoes and the spirits of the dawn 

That sing in choirs. And where the caverns yawn 

Which let out sleep, and death, and shame, and 

leprosy 
Upon this earth, you may find trace of me 
But here no more. 

The Old Man. 

Blasphemy! Blasphemy! 
He doth contemn this godlike life of ours. 

217 



The Girls. 

Blasphemy! Blasphemy! 
He doth condemn our warm, sweet midnight hours. 

He {moving away from the plain). 

I must go seek her on the icy rocks, 
Frost in my blood or flame about my head, 
Calling and calling where the echo mocks, 
Crying in the midnights where the ocean moans 
White in the darkness 

\^A man casts a great stone that strikes him on the 
shoulder. He falls on to one knee. 

Fool, though I be dead 
All here is nothing, but in her fair places 
My shade shall find her wisdom. 

The Girls. 

Stones! Cast stones! 

\A shower of stones strikes him down. He cries from 
the ground. 

All here is nothing. Whilst each mountain traces 
Shadows half-circling from every worthless dawn. 
My shade shall trace her to her twilit portal. 
Then, on a hill-top, on a shadowy lawn. 
Plain in the dew her footsteps ! 

The Old Man {striking a lance through his side), 

Dead! 
He [gasping). 

Immortal 
Goddess ! Wisdom ! Face o' Night! Beyond the twi- 
light bars [lie dies. 

The Old Man [striking the spear through him again). 

Cast stones ! 
218 



The Girls [to the men). 
Cast stones ! 



\They gather stones in their skirts and drop them in 
great number on to the body, until it has the re- 
semblance of a cairn. Whilst they hurry about the 
Old Man speaks to any that •will listen to him. 

For that this was a Prince raise him a tomb, 
Casting your stones on it. In sun nor gloom 

Come never here again Here shall be moans 

And whisperings of blasphemy to hear were doom 

Cast there, stones there, above his lips that lied. 

So be his name forgotten Never a word 

From henceforth of his dying. This true lance 
That slew him shall be burnt. . . . Never a word, 

Never a word of him again But dance, 

Choose a new mate for Lalag^'s soft side 
This night. Yes there, above his lips that lied. 

\They begin to disperse. 

A Young Girl. 
I would he had kissed me ere he died. 



The Old Man {shaking his head misgivingly, to 
another old maji). 

You heard ? 

\They all go away over the plain in groups of two 
and three; the poplars and the ruined temple have 
disappeared into the last light: the white garments 
have blue and purple shadows and the evening star 
shakes out brilliant rays in the dusky sky. 

219 



The Voice of a Young Girl {singmg m the 

distance). 

When he comes from seawards, 
When he comes from townwards, 
My love sings to me words 
That my heart Hkes well. 

\_The night wind sweeps down; the watch-fires at the 
foot of the hills spring up as if they had been re- 
pletiished and waver along the wind. It reaches the 
cairn of stones and runs with a sifting sound 
among the dry grasses around. It continues through 
the night. 



220 



A MASQUE OF THE TIMES O' DAY 

(A FRAGMENT) 

The Persons of the Masque : 

The Dawn that shall wear a saffron gown, and in her 
hair daffodils. 

High Noon that shall wear a golden dress and necklets 
of amber. 

Eventide that shall be habited in grey and have glow- 
worms on her brow. 

Night that shall be dressed in black zvith a coronal of 
stars and the crescent moon. 

The Scene shall be a hilltop, high in air, with the 
blue sky painted fair on the backcloths. There shall be 
a great gilt framework Sphere of the Universe, set with 
jewels for the stars, and with the Signs of the Zodiac. 
It shall revolve slowly, and within shall sit the Dawn, 
High Noon and others. In its centre there shall be a 
great Globe of the Earth with the lands and the seas 
fairly marked. Round about it shall go one score and 
four men bearing the four-and-inuenty torches of the 
Hours. Without, shall stand a Man and a Woman. 

A Chorus habited like a reverend old man shall enter 
and shall tell how that the Times of Day, being weary 
of long contentions for the Dominion of the earth, have 
set this Man and this Woman to choose which of these 
four shall have sole Empire. 

The Music shall sound, andwhen it shall have ceased, 
the Dawn shall step forth from the Sphere as it re- 
volves and shall say : 



I 



AM the Dawn, beloved by those that watch. 



Then High Noon: 
I am the Noon, beloved by those that toil. 



221 



7%^« Eventide: 
I am the Eve, beloved by those that tire. 

Then The Night : 
I am the Night beloved by them that love. 

Then shall those four dance together until the DA^VN 
stands forth from among them and sings: 

I am the Dawn, beloved by those that watch, 

I come a-creeping, I come a-stealing 

Over eastern mountains, over dewy lawns, 

Pale, golden, slender, pale and very tender. 

Unto you who've watched the night through hoping 

for the dawn's 
Rise to usher Hope back. 

A dance again, and then High 'i^oovi shall sing : 

I am High Noon, beloved by those that toil. 

I bring your resting times, ring your midday feasting 

chimes, 
Pan's hour that brings youpantingto the hedgerows, 
Dalliance in the river rushes, 
In the shadows and deep hushes, 
Over bee-filled beds of potherbs, over bird-filled, 

quivering woodlands. 
Blessed rest in summer days, surcease 'neath the 

Summer haze. 

A dance again, and in her turn the Eventide shall 
sing: 

I am the Eve, beloved by those that tire. 

All along the sunken lanes 
And across the parching plains 
I set dewy winds a-blowing, 
Bring the cattle byrewards, lowing ; 

222 



Bring the bats out, lure the owls out, lure the twilight 

beasts and fowls out; 
Bid a broadening path of moonbeams hunt the 

homing smacks from seaward, 
Flitting past the harbour lanthorns, trailing in a 

flight to leeward ; 
Set the harbour tumult rounding up the misty wind- 
ings of the mountains ; 
Set my tiny horns a-sounding by the rillets, by the 

woodland fountains . . . 
Tiny, tiny gnat-horns sounding in an intermitting 

cadence, 
Cry, " Stroll homewards men and maidens, 
Done is done and over's over. 
Leave the wheatfields, quit the clover. 
Masters, hired ones, all you tired ones, 
Troop along the dog-rose lanes, troop across the 

misty plains, 
Done is done ... is done, and over's over." 



The NlGKT sAall step forward and shall catch at the arm 
of the Eve. Then shall NiGHT say : 

{To the Eve) Enough, enough, 

You steal too many of my silent hours . . . 

(To the Man and the Woman) I am the Night beloved 

by them that love 
As you do love. 



I am that Night 
That was in the beginning, I am she 
That shall be the end . . . You come from me 
And hasten back to me, and all the rest 
Is shadow. 

223 



What's the Dawn ? 
The shadow of a dream . . . And what High Noon ? 
A vague unrest, a shadow on your slumbers . . . 
And Ung'ring Eve has shadows in her hair, 

The shadows of a shadow She's a thief 

That steals my attributes, and is beloved 
Because she is my shadow. 

I am Truth, 
A darkness, a soft darkness. And in that 
Is all that's worth the seeing. In my arms 
Is all that's worth the having. I'm august 
But tender . . . tender . . . Oh, you mortal things, 
That pass from Night to Night, from womb to womb 
I am the best. 

She sings. 
Over my grasses go, for a little while 
I'll bid my flowers breathe their faint night scents. 
For a little while 

Go close together, straining lip to lip, 
Go close together, straining heart to heart. 
For a little while . . . for all the time you have. 

She speaks again. 
The soft warm darkness shall hang overhead, 
The great white planets wheel from the horizon. 
You shall not know the nakedness of shame, 
Nor know at all of sorrow on the earth, 
The while I hang above you with the face 
Of a wan mother, white with light of stars. 

She sings again. 
Over my grasses go for a little while. 
Hearing no sound, seeing no sight of earth, 
For a little while 

Cling close together, straining lip to lip, 
Cling close together, straining breast to breast, 
For a little while ... for all the time you have . . . 
224 



[She speaks very low, as if to herself.) 

And at the last 
A wind shall sigh among my whispering grasses, 
The planets fail behind a brooding cloud, 
Your eyelids shall fall down upon your eyes 
And it shall be the end . . . 

She sings as if triumphantly. 

Under my grasses lie for the rest of time. 

Hearing no sound, thinking no thought of earth. 

For the rest of time. 

Lie close together, silent, ear to ear. 

Lie close together, slumb'ring hand in hand. 

For the rest of time, for all the time you have. 

Then shall men unseen in the roof of the hall hoist 
out of sight the gilt Sphere of the Zodiac, and there 
shall he disclosed a great globe of the Earth which had 
been hid within the other. Then shall the four Times 
of Day Dance a solemn measure round the globe to the 
sound of music. There shall be sundry devices. As that, 
there shall come a Woman called the Autumn habited 
in russet and garlanded with streamers of berries of 
the hawthorn. And this Autumn would have the Times 
of Day observe a nice distance, equal one from the other, 
and a flight of the birds called starlings shall be set free. 
Then shall a reverend man dressed in furs, and bearing 
a heavy burden of thorns cut faggot wise, enter. He shall 
he the Winter, and shall dispute with the A utumn as 
to the manner of the dance. He shall wish the Dawn and 
the Eve to stand nearer High Noon. And he shall 
prevail, and a flight of great wood doves shall cross the 
hall. And in like manner shall come the Spring a7id 
the Summer each with their due attributes. These last 
four shall join hands and dance round about the Times 
of Day. Then shall come men to the number of the cycles 
p 225 



that have passed since the year of our Lord's birth, and 
shall dance a solemn measure round them all. And a 
salvo of musquetoons shall he shot off without, beneath 
the windows of the hall. And ivhen the dance is ended 

The End Piece shall be sung — 

What if we say: 
" These too shall pass away.'' 
Whether we say it 
Now, or delay it 
How we may, 
These too shall pass away. 



226 



THE WIND'S QUEST 

OH, where shall I find rest? " 
Sighed the Wind from the west ; 
"I've sought in vain o'er dale and down, 
Through tangled woodland, tarn and town, 
But found no rest." 

" Rest thou ne'er shalt find . . ." 

Answered Love to the Wind ; 

" For thou and I, and the great grey sea 

May never rest till Eternity 

Its end shall find." 

Note. — These lines, the first I ever wrote, were printed in the 
Anarchist journal, The Torch, in 1891.