THE EATEN HEART
Under the reign of Mr. Bloom
When the loud machines beat on our minds,
We, that are children of despair,
Who see or think we sec so clearly Through Philoctetes' pain and Timon's rage How all hope's vain, all effort null;
We that tremble benv een n\ o worlds,
Half-regretting the old dead Europe Crumbling and melancholy as a deserted palace When the last king of the line has long been dead, Frightened yet moulded by the cold hard patterns
Beaten upon life by the loud machin
What do we know of love?
A man or woman might die for love And be glad in dying;
But who would die for sex?
Die for food or drink?
RICHARD ALDINGTON Better turn monk And keep your sp«rm for God And hard despair.
Will you die for a blind hot instinct,
The rut of insect and beast,
(0 stab the words hotnv till the wound is deep
to dull a fiercer pa/n)
l)ic for a female mammal —'
Two breasts and a curled slit? f O stab, till you sob with pain.)
Yet women have loved, and men have died for them.
11
O	Love—Euripides speaks—
O	love【lirough the eyes you speed desire,
In our souls you breathe dclighr.
Come not to inc, O Love, with an escort of woe, Harry me not beyond the strength of a man.
Ill
Women have loved, and men have died for them, And a woman has died for the man she loved.
Die? What! Die for remembered pleasures Or pleasures lioped for or pleasures dreamed of, Smooth caresses, the shock of spasms?
30
RICHARD ALDINGTON
But I say there is more in all this Than the delicate friction of two skins....
Do you know you live in a prison?
Do you know your own loneliness?
For lon^» years you are unaware of it,
Move and act in the world,
Talk, laugh, eat, play, make lovct Relieve yourself alive,
And never know you arc in deathly solitude.
All through rhe years you move among men and women, And you are imprisoned away from them, and they from you.
But within you is a world, a small human world,
A mysterious unconscious or half<onscious you,
Dumbly yearning in a wordless apathy To break from the prison in a rush of ecstasy,
In a tumultuous outpouring of itself,
A divine frenzy of tenderness and devotion,
To meet its sister world.
Sun after sun rolls from dawn to setting,
Inhuman constellations wheel above you,
A generation of buds points the bare spring branches, A generation of dying leaves drifrs past you;
RICHARD ALDINGTON
They who were children when you played a man's part Smile at your memories, never knew your dead,
And lonely, lonely is rhe spirit witliin you,
Lonelier【fum any Basrilie prisoner,
Lonelier than a barren /Cgean islet.
And yet you do not know ir,
Feel only a vague mysterious yearning,
A dim malaise, a something warning,
Whether your days arc mirthful or bleak with despair一 The cold despair of the mind.
Not rhe worse despair of the soul
And suddenly, unawares,【here is a meeting of eyes_
IV
It is true, of course, us Euripides says.
That what enters by the eyes is desire.
But desire for what?
Desire, indeed, for chc meeting of bodies一 Forourbodiesarc we, and the soul" is a metaphor To express the unknown in ourselves.
As "God ' is unknown in the universe;
And primordial urgent desire That life should be continued.
32
RICHARD ALDINGTON
For a moment there is strange tumult In the whole nature of man or woman. And in a flash all life is changed.
In a tumult of pain and joy
Such as I chink Philocteces felt
When he grasped the hand of Ncopcolcmus,
A friend, and the son of a friend, a saviour, Tlic breaker of bonds.
Rcicascr from a ten years prison.
(I have a riglit to rc-intcrprct a Greek cragcdy:
Take it as an expression of human loneliness,
Tlie dreadful incvirablc loneliness of the human soul.
Tlic tragedy of real pain and bitcerncss VC^hen the hope vanishes before human trcacher And human inainiprehension and indifference.
The tragedy which only a god could undo
If there were a god一 O Sophoclcan irony, your hard serenity!)
There in Philoctctes the tragedy is stated, Dramarised, sublimated in a pure serenity Strangely brcxxJing aloof over human loneliness

RICHARD ALDINGTON
This is the love of savages.
For, though the savage will kill for desire,
He will nor die for it;
Where men arc primitive, desire must be primitive, And therefore women arc slaves and chattels As in some respeas they still are一 And it is right they should be,
For they lack the magnanimity of free men.
With our hands and breasts we speak mysterious things Which the filter of speech rejects,
And only through the known, exterior body Do we rcadi the mysterious unknown within.
The desire I strive to express,
Hie desire 1 believe Euripides means,
(For a woman like Phaedra docs fxn die Because a man refuses her bed)
This desire is a complex thing,
Both civilised and primitive.
(For civilisation is nor only a complexity of material needs, But a complexity of passionate and mental needs,
The discovery and enjoyment of ourselves As well as of whac is outside ourselves.)
When desire speeds through the eyw
33
RICHARD ALDINGTON And what is true of the tonured Phiioctetes—
Who has nothing left but pride and despair一 Is universal, true to day, cruc of ourselves.
With us the tragedy is more complex and incohci Ir is sofrer and perhaps a little mawkisli Because it is so complicated with sexual desire Which leaves us so exposed 10 ridicule,
And we fear ridicule n>orc dun we fear the ^od;
里• brooding alone over lonely miseries about me. Think char for many, for most, perhaps,
Tliis tragedy never liappcas.
The moment never arrives,
Tlic miracle never occurs.
The need is i>cvcr felt一
(They may be unhappy in other ways.
But in this profound way they arc not unhappy.)
But to others the moment comes And the whole narurc is set free.
Is conscious of its totality, affirms itself, Escapes from negative existence, and lives. #I*his is whar happens to men and women When we see they arc suddenly changed And arc surprised a"hc change.
35

RICHARD ALDINGTON But—brief was ihc joy of All that passionate outpouring of self,
That sudden release, that immense deliverance, Kccoil on themselves in blind despair and apathy, If the response is null or inadequate,
If the sister-world is not really a sister world.
Most lives arc monologues, and so grow poorer; But conceive chc riches if the response is there, Question and answer, change and interchange, Positive life.
If the response is cherc, a life is hilfillcd,
For the dialogue life of those r^o narurcs Grows richer a thousand-fold Than the rwo monologue lives lived separately, Dwindling in rhdr own loneliness.
If there is some response, a reaching-out,
Either to chc full extent of a lesser world Or the partial extent of an equal or greater world, There remains a poignant memory, a dream— Laura or Beatrice.
I	do not deny the body, I praise it一 Thar is where Petrarch and Danre err一
36
RICHARD ALDINGTON
But the tragedy of eh waned sexual desire is nothing.
The true tragedy is chat of inner loneliness,
Philoactes agonizing on his lonely isle....
V
Now, under the reign of Mr. Bloom,
When the strange machines have killed the old Europe Which seems so easy and pleasant to us Because it was ungeometric, and is dead,
I	brood on the strange unhappy lives
And the hArd unhappy faces, sometimes so beautiful
But strangely hard.
We were right, yes, we were right To smash the false idealities of the last age,
The humbugs the soft cruelty, the mawkishnc&s,
The heavy tyrannical semimcncality,
The inability to face faas, especully new facts;
Ail of which linger on so damnably among u$.
We were right to question and to destroy,
Pitching out gods and fools, lumber and riches, Gearing away the falsities and pretentions.
We arc right too when we turn,
Even if with infinite regret, from the old dead Europe, And face the hard new world, the world of machines;
37
RICHARD ALDINGTON For wc cannot kill the machines,
And if we fight them, they will lull us.
I	think wc were fight to go groping in all forbidden places. Uncovering horrors politely forgotten And facing them too,
Making ourselves hard for the hard age of machines.
1 like the men and women of my age,
1 like their hardness,
For though wc are a battered and rather bitter set.
Still wc have faced the facts, wc have been pretty iioncst. But, sitting here bnxxling over ihe hard (aces,
I wonder i( we have not rejected coo much.
If we have not hardened ourselves coo much Mailing it impossible to break out of our self-prisons,
As if Phtloctctes had exiled himself?
Of course, you can say it is the War,
Buc you cannot put everything down to the War Nor to chc machines either.
Wc have mistaken the problem, overlooked the tragedy. We are all rather like Philoaetcs,
But wc do not know it.
It is noc true to say that life is more difficult一 Materially it is easier,
Only for ihe spirit is it more difficult 38
RICHARD ALDINGTON
Because, like the heroes of Sophocles We have looked too closely Or【〇〇 deeply into realities
And know, or think we know, that nothing is wonh achieving.
But, gazing back at the old dead Europe,
I think perhaps there is one thing worth achieving— Escape the fate of Philoctetes, the essential solitude, Achieve release, so that one s total nature At all points meets another's
Whereby life becomes positive and immeasurably enriched. Then something that is not oneself, a person,
Becomes so precious one would gladly die for it And would certainly, or almost certainly,
Die or kill oneself if suddenly deprived of it_
VI
llien I remembered the old Provence tale of tlie Eaten Heart,
Which, like the tale of Philoaetes, is a sort of myth,
But filled with profound meaning if you can see it.
For it has the savage desire which can only grasp or kill And the ocher love which is the complete exchange of nvo natures,
And in the dreadful sjonbol of the eaten heart
39
RICHARD ALDINGTON
Ic shows perhaps how a woman devours a man's life,
But it also shows how the man.s gift of himself is total,
And the manner of her death shows how her response is
total.
Here you have the last variety of this tragedy;
For if we assume that the lovers really were released.
That the gift and the response were total.
Then we see how a woman’s vanity and a man’s imprudence And the brutality of the world of men (Who always envy the happiness of others And hate nothing so much as the perfect communing of lovers)
How【hese things bring a sudden and tragic ending Leaving no fate for boch but death.
We have lost or thrown away
The power to live in this positive tragic intensity—
For if life is not a tragedy it is nothing.
And even if the release cakes place
And the dialogue of the two natures is perfect,
Srill, the end must be tragic. It is easy to see that. Though the fundamental, essential tragedy perhaps (Some say of course ')
Is not death, but birth.
40
RICHARD ALDINGTON
But if Euripides means what【think he means,
His prayer is vain;
None of those chosen can escape the escort of woe And the harrying beyond the strength of a man.
VII
Not in a vortex of con fusion Not />/ a slow sucking marsh Of stagnant habit O tods let us die
O
'Not under roofs of acquiescence Guide us O moon Bright face averted though loved Not under those
Hot hounds of disaster Swift steel of despair Launch at us freely
Grant us clean shrijt O gods Pity us never
VIII
But was it this I meant to say?
No, for what we mean to say is never said.
41
RICHARD ALDINGTON
It was a weak squabble with despair,
A verbose quibbling about Helen's hair.
What was he saying? Tliat we talk too much? By God, we do, and seldom utter rrurh.
Lucretius sat in his columned porch

In a Roman deck-chair, looking out to sea, Watching men drown with eager Scientific curiosity.
Watch me drown and afterwards Tell me if I did it gracefully.
Ah, that's the thing, just do it gracefully And listen to the grateful loud applause.
But, above all hings，let inot discompose you, Let not your earnestness appear__
''Helen, you ate my hearth
No, no, what a muddle you’re in.
I was not Helen，but Margarida.”
r Wellf but has she played her part?
She ought to jail from the lip of the tower,
And there she is prettily eating fruit.
Or are we both buried in Perpignan,
In a single tomb tn the southern isle 42
RICHARD ALDINGTON
Which gave much scope to the sculptors skill And made him bis name,
A f/d an epitaph penned by the King hirnsel]?
Thetuhis is one of those nasty dreams Which come to dead men under the paving}
W ben the last cowled friar has shuffled to i?ed And the church itself lies dead with the dead?”
Hush, you dead man, hush, be at rest;
The lettered slab is firm above you,
Solid the efiigy, fixed chc shield.
Your sighs and struggles will never move rhem , Time will wreck them, but not you.—
Hush, you dead man, acc a dead mans part And leave to the living die life you lost.
You shall have prayers and masses,
All things we choose to give the dead,
Bur the thing you ask for you shall not have.
IX
Pray for the soul of Gutlhem de Cabestanhf Pray for the knight oj the Eaten Heart.
43

PASSAGES TOWARD A LONG POEM
Troy’s down
and an old woman nods in the sun,
Electra:
'She with her eyes, and hair red as the blood on her slender hands, and swift eddy of passions, dust in the rock-tomb under the gold garments.
Kings shed blood for her sake— and I, the virtuous, the serf fs bride,
an old woman trembling in chilly sunlight, a king s daughter,
but not the lover or mother of kings.
Great deeds were wrought by the King, my father, but the passion in a woman's blood swept him moaning to the grave.
45
RICHARD ALDINGTON
No man has shed blood for my sake.
I armed my brother's hand but shrank and【rembled and wept when the sword pierced her womb, rhe woman men loved.
It was I who killed her;
who but a woman could have hated her so much? Cold, cold, and an end to her hot loves.
But who has loved me,
what man shed blcx>d for my sake?'*
Troy’s down, long down,
and an old woman trembles in the sun.
II	1
Tender as early leaves on fragile boughs, Slender as Isis,
Taut as supple mecal—
How shall you be praised?
46
RICHARD ALDINGTON
Syrinx no Pan shall pluck For waxen reed-pipes;
You yourself music Encranced and entrancing,
Piercing men s loins and breasts一 Pied Piper of lovers.
Frail mountain-ash
Weighted with coral fruit-clusters,
Your branches hold me,
Leaves murmur touching me.
My hand rests lightly upon you.
2
You are flowers and gems, Flower-star-eyes!
What shall we gadier to please you? Corals and jade and lapis.
Steal the lapis from the Gesu To make your necklaces and charms, Jade from the Antipodes Negro chains and beads Blue Mexican pebbles.
But no, no pearls
The stones of dowagers and virgins.
47
RICHARD ALDINGTON
Ah! but your flower-likc
More precious even chan your gem-like,
Your tenderness——
Here is cyclamen
Thar stands so stiff and pink
And has such honey at its heart,
And wild narcissus
Soft and scented like your little breasts, And one carnation like an op>en jewel.
IIT
Gold head by black head
laid close on the pillow,
ripe yellow muscat grapes
warm from low sunlit slopes
mingled with the dark shy clusters
of cool black grapes
from the shy dark mountain side.
Gold, sun-scented clusters, Black, violet-bloomed dusters,
exquisite fruition of the mysterious vine rooted in the dark red flesh of men, the aching ardent bodies of
m
rocn-
48
RICHARD ALDINGTON what wine, what wine shall be poured from you when you are crushed (for you must be crushed, the exquisite grape dusters golden and black must be crushed, give up their perfume and their strength) when you are crushed in the hot wine-press?
For the ripe grape with its exquisite mysterious wine, its taste of perfumed life, dreads not the hot encompassinsr press,
but yearns to be pressed into smooth wine to stir die dark red flesh of men where the vine roots that bear the grape clusters black dusters and gold clusters.
And the dark clusters droop tenderly over the gold grapes, and【ender leaves of the vine and faint delicate tendrils
drift together in a soft muramriog wind,
rippling over them,
blowing them together and apart.
Crush black grape and gold, for our lips parch for the wine,
49
RICHARD ALDINGTON
the wine of fulfillment, the wine of reconciling, the wine of peace.
For to drink that ardent mysterious wine (ardent and mysterious as the bodies of men) is a thing ultimate and positive, a release of the body and the spirit.
If you attain that fulfillment,
achieve that reconciling,
then you achieve an ultimate peace,
Dionysiac peace
among the gold and black grape dusters so mysteriously reborn with all【heir fine bloom and potency after【hey are crushed in the hot wine.press^
White fingers of Maenads in the frenzy of the god tear apart,
rend morsel from morsel the dark red flesh of men, the phallus-bearers, the indispensable servitors of the god's sacrifice, impetuously and in frenzy tear out quivering life.
50
RICHARD ALDINGTON
But the crushed grapes bloom again, and the torn body lives again in fulfillment and reconciling and peace.
This is the mystic sacrifice
of the Dionysiac tearing of die flesh
and crushing of the grape clusters.
The old gods arc the most living,
the primitive mysteries the most purifying,
the most ancient S)rmbols rhe truest.
Black grape and gold grape
and dark flesh rent.
IV
Be not too eager impetuously【〇 intervene, for these are subtle growths hard to control.
How easily【he spring may swerve to an empry wind.
Cold irony, ro grasp so soon the flcshless hand.
51
RICHARD ALDINGTON
This was a delicate tiling lies broken here, as if a shafe of aighr should kill the dawn.
There can be no appeal from wasce and death, nothing for us to acr or hope or speak.
All speech, all movement vain, all hope defeat; useless to say farewell, useless to weep.
Drink, since you must, this strange foretaste of death, and suffer that despair to share your bed.
V	1
Be unto me as sunlight Revealed and revealing the Infinite life-spaces, hitherto darkly Guarded by death-dragons; and 52
RICHARD ALDINGTON
】n beautiful radiance
Touch me alive with slender rays.
2
Lips tha【never lost their sweetness, Nor formed a bitter line;
Delicate frail face and forehead. Eyes of pain,
Eyes of a sweet him child,
Eyes that toudi me to the heart—
0	chat for long and long
1	might feel your presence,
Eyes with a dawn in them.
3
When I rcrumed to London After a long absence,
The beautiful scarier moror-buses Seemed like gay lacquered coaches.
A little later they appeared As sinister red hearses Conveying the dead souls Of a nation.
RICHARD ALDINGTON
4
Think well of me, biu noc too well.
I would not seem to fail you.
As I must,
If you esteem me overmuch;
Bur love me more than well,
For too much love
Was never known beneath the sun.
And only your great love
Can soothe chat shame
Of knowing me unworthy of your love.
5
Yes, I have cried my pain aloud
Buc left the deeper bitterer grief unspoken;
Yes, I have been misjudged
But thought it proper to respect my judges;
Yes, I have been betrayed
Bat paid the traitors with ironic kisses;
Yes, I have suffered wrongs.
Been punished for my virrues,
Found my best gifts counted as my worst sins___
But what of that?
You see I smile and smile, and stay a villain.
54
RICHARD ALDINGTON
VI
And I shall wait while the huge wind passes
whitening the barren blue sea-acrcs and the wild olive-trees while the wind sobs
and violently knocks at window and door shaking the rcx>m with a passion of grief until my heart shakes with it I shall wait
in the still places of the soul behind the talk and tears I shall wait
and behind other sighs and kisses and less urgent thoughts 1 shall waic
because I have looked into eyes
of dawn and twilight
kissed the lips of her
who is my sister and my flesh
and the blood shaking in my heart
I shall wait
yes I shall waic
for a word the beckoning of a white hand
55
RICHARD ALDINGTON
1 shall wait yes yes
and the inevitable heart-break
1 shall await
VII
They say the lion and but here lizards life-flashes over stonily rocks why do the english hate life but so does raucous italy
fingering cento lire that oleander mouth is
but
diverse spiriting wavering
in agate eyes the inner fire consumes
and life renews
VIII
I shall buy a parrot，
I shall call it Maude Cambronne;
It shall be present at all my Waterloos. Snap loud, parrot.
56
We shall drift upon the river And read romantic books To the music of a record Playing Cesar Franck or Strauss; Snap loud, parrot.
Cynical, explosive parrot,
Are you honest as you’re shrill?
Do you lure me, feathered Faustus, Down the tarry paths of hell?
Snap loud, parrot.
Do 1 live for copulation?
Do I live for ham and wine?
O my parror, raven-heaned,
O my parrot, not yet mine?
Snap loud, parrot.
When I air ray witless folly,
When I dogmatise in print,
When I lull the shuddering terrors With a cradle-tune of cant;
Snap loud, parrot.
Parrot, when Im half-successful, When I think I'm rather good,
RICHARD ALDINGTON
When I*m half inclined to purchase
Half-indulgences from God.
Snap loud, parrot.
I shall buy a parrot,
I shall call it Maude Cambronnc;
It shall be present at all my Waterlcx>s. Snap loud, parrot.
IX
Ci-git un homme de paille,
Nc, sans avoir de naissancc, Fastueux, cjuant a la caille, Heureux, dans les lieux d'aisance; I! n*avait pas bcaucoup d espoir Et se fichaic bicn dfen avoir.
11	n'aimait pas beaucoup Dieu Qui lc lui rendait bicn,
II donnait des torts a c'Vieux: £c Dieu n'lui donnait—ricn. Ainsi, de saison cn saison,
II pcrdaic jusqu*a la raison.
O Passanc, qui lis ccst mots Inscrits sur une tombe sans croix,
58
RICHARD ALDINGTON
Va ton chemin, mon beau,
Et benis 1c Ncant, notre roi.
Adieu, mcs amis et mcs poules,
Adieu, adieu—tas de moules.
X
Unyielding
there is no way out
mosa ic mask threaceas and laughs
that blood was wasted
so were his hers mine
I always knew that brought the gravest pang
there is no way out
who said so? he said so
No I said so
up chose winding stairs
so long and tedious【〇 mourn alone
always the mosaic mask
that nothing says and says too much
there is no way out
except the inevitable final plunge
and that's not soon
And yet tex) soon
round and up they wind
and up and round
blind feeling with finger tips
59
RICHARD ALDINGTON
up and round
there is no way out
but why have entered?
yes why have entered?
entered? well rhe mask said enter
so beautiful a mask
I forgot the blood
so beautifully so like a god
said enter I forget the blood
ran stumbling upwards too eagerly
then che mask changed
and yes there is no way out
6〇
_____________________________________________
SEPADS: A MODERN POEM
(To Walter Lowenjels)
I
Let nothing stand between you and water thrills.
Unless you snap the lever
swank looks like a pin.
So many fascinating possibilities fully practical
In individual triangular portions, correctly planning the miraculous cloch and wet sticky sand.
These fellows who cop all are as comfortable as bare feet in amethysts, alexandrite, kunzite, zircons.
That dark-brown morning taste
whose four great routes penetrate and explore soft-covcrcd elastic threads (no drain pipe)
highly illustrated without binding or bunching!
61
RICHARD ALDINGTON Get your shoulders into it, sparkling windows,
when orange blossoms arc a memory in yellow and rurquoisc
of these smiling sentinels, your facial loveliness
without excessive foaming
I'*
or liquefying, mile after mile.
Although English in origin
you'll find him of real assistance
until the great round-bdlied po is full.
A procession of ^ ooden horses properly buttressed
At the sides with many thousands of miles, with lustrous chromium bands, thundering machinery, gulf blue, mellow cream, niagara green, concentrated, homogenized and almost unbelievable.
Slash at it murderously.
When trails tough beaches beckon off with a leap.
62
RICHARD ALDINGTON
WJZ WBZ WBZA WHAM WREN KDKA WTMJ KSTP
With the question of body beauty
uppermost
all this is natural and logical.
Send that parror away and
look co strange corners;
684,000,000 horsepower
makes the finish last longer一 finger-tip steering of 【o-day’s li he young man and slender young woman very modern, tough, amber<olored,
white and brown,
completely transparent wrapping. (It’s so good that
you’ll want to hurry.)
Heavy, heavyt hangs over head ike world’s dietic urge.
Have you heard it yet?
The magic mellow melody?
Twenty-eight to thirty-seven dollars!
63
RICHARD ALDINGTON Even in feminine hands
the jerks and sudden rebounds of sinewy cords completely cushioned are ductile
and create unusual excitement, kneading and working together, fiery, hot, pipe and nipple: fast as a fish,
dyed forever!
O woman's perpetual search
for something different! (Originality in every art
proclaims the master.)
Hair and skin emanations——
the lustre dies— catch on a cellar window.
Are you the type of woman
conveniently located everyw here now? Mild, delicious, smooth?
Super-dynamic speaker, power-pack, over a coast-to<oast hook-up? Staunch under punishment, smartest and snappiest, decidedly up to the minute?
Eureka!
64
IN THE RAIN
I said,
' the town bird lifts a lordlier head/' you said,
’the wild-swan only is kingly”; had I run less swiftly across the square (in rhe rain)
I had had breath to explain ; "but this, but chis —
Okiss
that you did not give,
0	name of tenderness that you did not name.
2.
1	am glad;
the cold is a cloak,
the gold on die wee stones
is a carpet laid;
my hands dutch at the rain,
no pain in my heart
but gold,
gold,
gold
on my head, a crown;
while the rain pours down and the gutters run,
(the lake is over-flowing and sodden,)
I say to myself,
f，I am glad he never said good-bye nor questioned me why
暴	*
I was late.**
3.
You were late yesterday,
Vm late to-dayt but he didn't say,
•Tm sorry I kept you waiting,**
(the rain beats in my eyes again,)
I lifted my face.
M. D.
surprised
ro see no answer in his, no kiss,
(love is a trap, a snare,) a bird
lifted a passionless wing; nothing,
nothing was ever so fair
as the wonder that clutched at me there
unaware
under rhe rain;
my brain sang
a rhythm I never dreamt to sing,
"I will be gay and laugh and sing, he is going away,*'
丨
I am free;
0	pavements spread me your gold,
1	am young,
I am young,
I am young whom Love
had made old.
87
H. D.
4.
I will be free, no lover’s kiss to bind me to eanh, no bliss of love 【〇 coumeracr actual bliss,
(the wind, the rain) no pain of love ro cur the fibre of joy that the wind is cold, that the old, old streets are beautiful
and the way to the temple, that the coun will yet be bountiful with box-tree and myrde,
that the grove has recompense of dedmec
and mchet-trcc incense, and that some day I will care:
88
then the air
will be full of multiple wings;
【he fountain-basin bare of ripple and circlet, will spring into life,
will duplicate ring on translucent ring of amethyst warcr, purple and rare crimson;
the naked pillar will show
vermilion;
in【he empty square
rhe god will stand
with his bow
and intimate arrows;
my heart will quiver and bow,
I will start, remember
the touch of your hand on my brow,
(it was burning,
you healed it,
it was parched
and you cooled ic)
but now,
I can walk by the shrine
H. D.
and the sacred rows of transplanted apples, (Cydonian?) a barbarian, an ignorant stranger who knows nothing of love.
Doves
circle and glitter and flare wing and fcarher, very-stare of the upper air (where Love is) do I care?
I seek sustenance otherwise; elsewhere I End shelter;
I bind
the dark, dark fibre of laurel; spite of you, spite of all,
90
co spite and in respite,
I will bow to one God;
(O intimate song, my Lord,
Ofirc
and the Word,);
1 will leave
your personified things, find strength by an empty altar.
6.
Don*t come there,
don't come,
you have all the world,
go anywhere,
everywhere,
you have cloak and wings and a rod
all the paths arc yours,
all, all the altars
save one，
this one
of my intimace God: don't come near,
go here, there,
where you will, you are Hermes,
Lord-of-the-dead,
you arc a man,
feigning the god head
or a god prerending a man s weakness,
a man's wiles,
frowning
or swift to smile,
you a god above
and a god below,
Hermes,
treading the track of the dead; you said,
you were late yesterday; had a staunch hean bled at a casual word from a casual word from a casual man? a god said,
' you were late**;
you go to the under-world or the gate of heaven.
while I tread an earth
devoid of your couch, (unutterable bliss,) 【hank God, devoid of your kiss.
Your head
is bound with the myrtle, is bound with the bay, is bound with the red rose;
God knows
(being God)
why you stay with us,
why you trifle and traffic
and play
with us;
if you lose,
if you gain,
do you care?
a snare is Love, a shame.
who arc maimed with Love,
H. D.
totter and falter and stare, lost in a world defamed,
bound round the ankles with violets, with myrrh
and with half-opened myrrh,
【wiling unutterable sweet
and lost,
lost,
lost;
a wreck,
is a man’s heart， touched of the wing of immonal ecstasy, we axe maimed and weak and yet
I was dead and you woke me, now you are gone, I am dead.
94
IF YOU WILL LET ME SING
If you will let me sing,
that God will be
gracious to each of us,
who found his own wild Daphne
in a tree,
who set
on desolate plinth, image
of Hyacinth.
CHANCE MEETING
Take from me something, he it all too fine
and untranslatable and worthless for your purpose, take it, ir*s mine;
no one can give as I give, none can say,
' rake bountifully and smile and go away, then, hate forever; do not stoop to send the little missive that might slay or end this pain forever.'1
Your one word might stay the pain;
but do nor send it;
keep yourself out of it, inrransicnc;
finish what you have begun,
write swiftly
with a stylus
dipped in sun
and tears
and blood,
hail
and snow;
dip stylus in the beauty of the translatable things you know ； the things I have are nameless, old and true; they may not be named; few may live and know.
2.
Our hands that did not couch, might have met once, might just have gathered this one in this one; impersonal fire beyond us might have rushed
into our fingers;
we'd have known then
(being true)
one of the other;
our hands might have crushed
red petal
of an island rose,
have done
with vanity of written word and rhyme,
might have known once (just in those fingers) other’s leaves and stones, touched Miletus, known Samos, lifted scones from a small shelf at Delos, let grass slip and sea-weed,
(dead ten thousand years ago that withers never) in between oar hands, laughed even;
H. D.
heaven is a near translatable thing; it's here, it*s there----
3.
1 thought my【hought might spoil your thought, being fierce and rare, holding bright points as stars in the raid-air, slaying and hacing that which it loves most, even as the sun the host of stars ac night; even as the sun must slay the stars by day,
I thought my thought would slay
I thought your thought
was rare,
made maps for men, the words you write arc chan and rudder in a storm
100
H. D.
or bright as light house set above the shoals;
I choughc your stars must shine for men, while mine, must shine alone, invisible,
to dominate me at noon while others say,
"the stars are gone, how odd to see even a wisp of moon, by day";
Isay,
I thought that you might share my thought, might cry,
rfThe stars are shining,
ringed about with the intolerable light
of the sun•”
4.
Why did I think of others,
(being untrue,)
101
H. D.
say to myself,
’’this one and (his and this
were wrecked by you,"
say,
' you have taken ruthless and with power, a burning glass that concentrates; the fire
once stolen, you reject the ash, you take the spirit, let the body go, to wander like the ghosts Adiilles knew." why did I hesitate?
I heard a voice,
reiterate an oracle that gravely spoke*
"you took and did not give,
you praised and knew
the song they made was worthless
and the note
they sung
was dross,
102
H. D.
heavy and leaden by your silver-note, the throat they lifted to bared winds was slain
by voices in die wind;
you heard,
they did not hear;
you used them as the oracle, the seer 【ha【speaks numb and unheeding what he
says,
you bled them of their genius, being dear
to oracle and altar of the San, we say,
you took whatever fire there was and left them without love and without power;
desire crept to your knees, you cook it not to warm yourself but to tempt near
the things thar othewise must perish in the wind and fire/*
5.
You didn’t know
103
those gcxls that pass, chose feet that come and go, the parting of the curtain where waves swell,
the holy sands, the sunken holy well, the wave that burns
and breaks a sharper blue because for just one moment
some deft thought severed the curtain of that 'then*' and now/*
You thought as poets think,
suavely it*s true,
and you could turn
intricate river-runmes into words,
tell
wave-lengths in brave metres; all the same
the spell had passed you,
left you comfortl
ess;
you did not sense the wings beyond the
gate;
you could not see.
you could not touch and feel actually the sea-sand and the sea-shell.
If you had caughc my hand, we would have dipped our fingers in an icy river, sipped a nectar
that had spoiled your life, slain sister, daughter, mother,
friend and wife, demanded headier loves than your heart knew.
CHOROS TRANSLATIONS
(From the Bacchae)
1.
Who is there,
who is there in【he road?
who ii there.
who is there in the street? back,
back each to his house, let no one, no one speak; chasten your tongues;
0	cease
from murmuring, for swift,
1	cry with every note of consecrated speech my song to Dionysos.
O happy, happy each man whom predestined fate leads to the holy rice
H. D.
of hill and mountain worship;
O blessed, blessed spirit who seeks the mountain
goddess,
Cybele mother-spirit, who carrying aloft the rhyrsis ivy-wrapt
waits upon Dionysos.
Bacchantes, swift, be swift,
invoke and draw him back from Phrygian mountain peaks, (God s son whom God begot) back to the broad paved sacred towns of Greece.
2.
O Thebes, Semeles nurse,
crown,
crown yourself with oak leaf
and dance,
dance.
108
dance
ecstatic; bind white wool to the deer pelt, lift high
the sacred narthex,
and dance until the earth dance;
the earth must dance
when Bromios
conducts
his sacred high priests from hill
to distant hill peak,
(those women whom rhe distaff
no longer claims
nor spun cloth)
driven mad,
mad,
mad
by Bacchus.
3.
Ah, it is sweet on the hills to dance in sacred faun-pelt, to dance until one falls faint, to beat the sacred dance-beat
H. D.
until one drops down worn out;
ah, it is sweet to rush on then
to Phrygian hill peaks, to taste the sacred raw flesh of mystic sacred goat-meat; ah, it is sweet, ah, sweer
the Lydian hills with Bromios; Evoe,
Bromios leads us, bearing aloft the narthex, himself
even as the pine-torch,
himself the flame and torch-light,
cries,
on,
on,
on;
the fields drip
honey
and wine
and white mild;
the torches smell of incense;
on，
110
on
H. D.
cries Bacchus, Bromios, rousing the wandering wild pack, enchanting them with glad shouts, tossing his glorious hair loose; he chants, he cries,
O, O forth golden
as gold-decked Tmolos; Bacchantes beat deep drum-no【e， with Phrygian chanr, sing Evios, with sacred flute and sweet notes incite,
incite our wild dance from hill
to distant hill peak;
so hearing him,
Bacchantes leap out，
and as the wild-colt in meadows
111
H. D.
round its mare's feet, they beat
ecscatic dance-bcat.
4.
Strophe. Again,
again in the nighc,
shall I beat white feet in delight
of the dance
to Dionysos?
shall I bare my throat to che night air
and the dew in the night?
again shall my pulses beat
like the deer
escaped from the net,
from the knots
and the huntsman s shouts,
from the hounds
and the hunting riot?
shall I lie in the meadows sweet,
escaped,
escaped from the lot of men，
like a faun in the desert， like a wind
112
by the river bank?
again,
again
shall I rest
ecstatic in loneliness, apart in the haunted forest, hidden by leaf
and leaf-branch?
O which of the gifts of the gods
is the best gift?
this,
this,
this,
this;
escape
from the power of the hunting pack and to know that wisdom is best and beauty sheer holiness.
Antistrophe. Hard,
hard it is to wake the gods,
but once awake,
hard,
hard,
hard is the lot
of the ignorant man, fanatic,
saying the gods are noc; cunning,
cunning their nets, hiding time s long, long tracks, snaring the wretch; think noc
by thought to escape predestined fate; it is so easy to know wisdom is right, easy,
easy to bow to God in His might; doubt not, rather accept; daemons have strength, raual is rooted in earth, ancient and blest.
O which of the gifts of the gods
is the best gift?
this,
this,
this,
114
this;
escape
from the power of the hunting pack and to know that wisdom is best and beauty sheer holiness.
Epode. Hope
has manifold power,
hope,
hope
has manifold face to manifest men, each different; some win, some fall; happy, happy he who safe from the sea find his sea-port and home; happy, happy he who rests
when his work is done;
happy the man of wealth,
happy of power,
but happier, happier far
H. D.
I count
mysterious,
mystical happiness,
this one
who finds
day by day,
hour by hour,
mysterious,
mystical，
not to be spoken
bliss.
Strophe, Stalk,
stalk the prey, away,
away to【he hills, liell-hounds of madness, swift;
leap toward the hideous freak, this monster of wickedness, track Pentheus down, the clown,
mimic in woman's dress; on to the hills, the rest
116
H. D.
leave to his mother first, leave to the dancing host, let the wild Maenaeds press toward him who would betray; hear,
hear his mother cry: arise,
arise and slay incarnate wickedness, a god-less man and unjust;
who, who has borne this beast, no woman, rather she
whelp of a desert lion or Libyan Gorgoness; who,
who has dared appear?
(hear,
hear his mother firsc,
spying him from the covert,
from the steep ledge of hillock,)
hear,
hear,
O Bacchus, see
H7
who desecrates the hills, the hills belong to us, invoke, invoke
armed Justice,
let Dike stand fonh manifest, let her step forth and slay, slash him across the throat, this monster,
Gorgon bom,
Echion born and born of earth.
6.
Agave. Take me,
my guardians,
here I shall look upon
no,
no,
no Cidiaeron; my sisters and me, one in our misery shall re-invoke no old passions and mysteries; the thyrsis shall pass on to other Dionysians;
O let me never see haunted mad Cithaeron nor Cithaeron
see me.
来
HYMN TO THE PRESENT DAY
' Beauty is order, manifest, conspicuous, resplendent.** —The Dublin Review.
This is the full age of faith;
Not of works or of hope: our plan Is to affirm it even in the fact of death.
What matter what becomes of man?
Therefore not Angkor-vat
Nor Chartres, nor Mycenae shall crown
Our times: we know better than that.
We exult rhough we stifle and drown
In the fumes of faith in ourselves Blown through millions of factories Where clanking machines heave and crawl,
And only the human being dies;
123
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
Dies to give place at the last
%
To the slave without power to be free,
The automaton man, entrapped in a plan Without issue or liberty.
For it is all the same nor to our faith Whether we think or refuse:
Whether we stan?e now for beauty, long dead,
Or worship the pigs and the Jews.
II
The products of Woolworth are better Than the gold from the dim Theban graves;
We, serving the public, as all good Rotarians should do, Have no need for the Minoan waves,—
The Horsemen of T'ang shall not guide us To achieve our own pathway of grace:
We have enough to do to follow out Ford and Morris;
It is enough to keep pace.
Sixteen horse power is more useful Than a Shakespeare or Aeschylus line,
It is enough to make automobiles, collar studs, face powders and Sunday newspapers:
And a dynamo is divine.
\24
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER We have no need of Aquinas or Plato to teach us;
We make the past a sheer blank.
Having put into a museum everything from star-busks to Michaclangelos
To please the archaeological crank;
We go to the future of interchangeable parts, parts of brain and of body,
Of soul and of mind.
With a super-Mussolini and his patent mechanical salesmen to guide us,
And the Devil behind.
Ill
This is the full age of faith:
The eager faces,
Heans full of longing, eyes unsatisfied, Will never make it theirs;
For they have vision
Of a world far from this where human beings Walked towards beauty
Down quieter ways;
A world no longer theirs nor shall they gain ic Till they accomplish in one act of sin
125.
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER Destruction of the past and of the present, Till chaos rushes in:
Black【hunderclouds breaking over Tlie furious desire Of crossed self-affirmations
fire!
Towards no completion
In hope or love, again and yet again,
Shall man unquenchably scatter The tumult in his brain:
But only to scurry further From the face of justice and the final pain. Snarling and yelling at【he chains【hat bind him， Man going mad because of his fellow man.
IV
This is the full age of faith,
And death is its final reward.
Man must take deadi from the empty sack of the ages, Naught making less hard
His disgrace: once walls had uprisen 126
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER Sculptured with millions of saints to proclaim That life was more than a shameful dull prison,
Death more than a meaningless name.
One melodies proudly sounded Strong to beguile all fear.
Once and for all, unbounded,
The glories of Paradise, clear,
Blazed on the walls to dispel The iron power of deadi.
Now there is nothing to conquer,
Life is only an evil breath:
Fumes of the multitude gathered In the halls for Hollywood’s lies.
Roads banked deep with the gas of exploding motors, Humans crawling like flies,
Seas polluted and lands degraded;
This is the full age of faith.
Man spitting into the face of the Holy Spirit Ere he rets away at last in his final death.
127
峯
JAZZ AGE
Palpitating,
Crepitating,
Rattle, throb, and thump the jazz-drums in the morning; Skeleton fingers tapping at the windows,
Fists char pound stretched parchments of dull sky.
People waken to their summons,
Roused by the endless broken rhythm That rolls onward, bleakly springing Over the monotonous core of human toil.
For the old flesh holds its secret:
Flame that blazes, flame that smoulders,
Choked, convulsive,
Buried in the clank of metal,
Rattle of rods and whirr of fly-wheels;
Sudden hiss of steam escaping Down lifers long dry torrent bed.
Passive faces,
Slavish faces,
Suck it in,
129
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER Drink it in;
Flutter of pale sticks upon the snare-drum,
Boom of the bass drum steadily rising,
Whirr of rattle, shriek of whistle, scrape of sand:
Tootle of shrill clarinet, saxophone's lament, and trombone s blare;
In great gulps they drink them,
Tossing, swaying,
Silcot-lippcd, with trance-enkindled stare.
Palpitating,
Crepitating,
Cold, alcx)f, and without feeling,
Like the spinning and the droning Of mad dervishes in a temple
Gashing now and then their breasts with glittering knives: Thresh the drums about a shadowed altar Draped with long steel bands that quiver,
Swimming tlirough revolving searchlights,
Where there stands a curious shape for human prayers:— Hands that lift and jerk out sideways,
Joints of steel and heart a watchspring,
Brain a black disc ever revolving,
Eyes electric bulbs, and mouth a megaphone.
Screeching out "Step faster, faster!0,
Watches the god, alone.
130
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
Toes of dancers Twirl to it;
Bodies wriggle to it,
Hammers rise and fall
In a hundred cities, to its rhytlim.
Millionaires
Count their gains to its springing rattle; Suicides' revolvers crack To its descending tones,
Aeroplanes glide through the sky,
To its swift glissandos;
Ships move to its long crescendos, Dynamos revolve and spray out sparks To its steady boom.
Things grow better,
Swifrer, berter,
On this planet Day by day;
Labour wasted,
Effort wasted,
Scamped and overhasted,
Hustle; you must pay.
Money, money Moves the planet;
Best look sunny,
131
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
Dance until you fall: that is the way.
Happy, happy,
Trip it quick and still be snappy,
Do not stoop to pity,
Do not ask the reason.
Life has thrills and kicks in every season,
Thought cannot allay/'
Palpitating,
Crepitating,
Flutter, boom and cluck rhe drums at morning.
Half the world across.
Trombones bray responses, fiddles squeak, pianos thump and roar:
Rattling bones make answer,
Skeletons of dead hopes suspended In the tumult;
Galvanized by life char surges onward,
Wave on wave of fire up-rising in the darkness
To the down-crash and the cold still pebbles of rhe shore.
132
MANHATTAN NIGHTS
Into the dry marches conquering dusk;
But the dry has the power to alter night.
Stecl-anchored towers thrust
Into its path pitfalls and spears of light.
The spilth of toil cast forth
Upon the pavements slowly foams away
In a last flurry of torn evening papers:
The dry addresses itself to hard-won play.
Sky-signs drip jewelled words
Over new multitudes, sprung from God knows where; Poised over subways, canyoned streets bleed slowly: Rose, blue, green, white, they flicker, writhe and flare.
Till drum-beats and dropped cunains grant release To some untiring wanderer, who, upright,
Carries down pavements of forsaken peace The bitter ecstasy of a martyred night.
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
II
All night I lay awake,
And heard
From the bays to the south, thunder upon the outskirts Shaping an angry word.
The towers trembled:
They drew more close together, in a spasm of fear;
As if Life-prisoning courtyards
Hated to think of raindrops falling clear.
orm would no【burst in full fury.
Frightened, it slunk away
To the wide craggy bays, the familiar pine-strewn hillsides: It could make no impression on buildings in packed array.
Ill
What angel or god drives us onward, What peace can make quieter, save These harried folk that down Broadway Butt forward, wave against wave?
Heaped high in rectangular offices Through the day, without leisure or an, 134
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
Willi sullenly explosive movements They now push their prisons apan.
But if the lights failed and the shuttles
Of the swift trains could not run,
If darkness suddenly, blindingly descended,
What screams and shouts and mad laughter Would burst from these throats to the sky?
What courage would blaze here one moment
Ere trampled under the feet of those not yet ready to die?
After a long fierce day of anxious striving,
Weary in myself with the surge of endless effon,
1 went past derricks and boarded-up chasms,
Past bumping trucks and clattering drills and shriek of police-whistles,
Where an old street of crumbling brown-stone houses Waited still, mcxiking the march of the towers with its
The sky aloft to wesmard faded, smoky orange and rose;
What then would be done?

IV
decay.

135
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
Softly the breeze blew from southward, cleansing the stagnant air,
Faintly the evening star glimmered over【he lirtered pavements.
Death seemed more easy then, as if it had a meaning:
Life seemed less empty, as if it had a song.
O dry of my nights and despairs, who said char your skies could be render?
There was none who had learned that lesson in all that rhrong!
May. 1929.
136
漆
DEMOLITION OF THE WALDORF-ASTORIA
New York, May, 1929
late-brown walls with tablets damped in jaws
Of lions: dark ring-bearing claws Depending from great flag-poles chat outspring Over the pavement: what do these things bring?
And forks against the tide of human lives.
Passing and forever passing, day on day,
Envious or indifferent to the array Of tables set with silver, glass, and flowers:
While our beyond the flag-poles mardied the hours
Of festive days with their contending folds Of broad striped banners. Now this moment rolls A quarter century from my mind that sees
137
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
Them bellying ourw ard stiffly in the breeze
Tliat blows up half-a-mile of harness-reins,
And agitated bites and hooves and manes.
Rattling forever onward towards a shore That soon will never find them any more.
U
Through my lone listening creeps the sudden din Of glittering picks that hack their way within Green cupolaed turrets and start slowly down;
A flash of blue sky through the chocolate brown
Of walls rent open. Downwards are out-rolled Upon the pavement costly marbles, gold Mosaic and deep leather armchairs where Ggar-smoke once stole out in superheated air.
Long tapering fingers languidly lifting spoons,
Now, blunt and squat, lift shovels. Under the moons Of table lamps, the looped and creamy weight Of floating curtains split, lets loose the freight
Of orchids and bright napery pell-mell thrown Into iron trucks along with crumbled brick and stone. 138
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
Wliat can I gather, seize
III
From hungry pell-mell years;
What memories can I pile
*
Beside this sharrered wall?
Roses that bloomed unsung Beside a garden-path，
Great gold chrysanrhe Like the sun s disc over slaty-blue mountains descendinc.
Wild violets shy, remote; Magnolias late remembered, The folded sleep of poppies Set in the seeded grass.
Asters that blazed when love Entered at last my hean;
Purple mesquite that puffed
Its smoke-balls our into the thunderous morning ;
Heaped peonies, rhododendrons
Like silken rajahs set on thrones of jade; Valleys where bluebells hung,
A lonely lake under the still grey trees;
139
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
And those forget-me-nots
Tliat once I saw beside a birch-fringed pond;
Reflecting into the waters their pure tint,
A colour more remote and still than any sky.
These arc the memories that upon the screen Of mind I brush, to mark eternal transience there; The screen is folded up, and thrown away;
And in its stead I face the surge of death.
IV
A boy's face pressed against a darkening pane; Without the city alters; slow the rain Specks the grey pavements where the landaus rolled Their waves of luxury through the sunset s gold; Springtide of life comes now ； he does not guess How scx>n that pageant fades to nothingness.
And years come fast, and many years go past. Love bitter-sweet smiles, beckoning, and at last Love is a painful hope; wars come and earth Is shaken, pallid, waiting a new birth;
Far from the glossy carriages, and the dreams Of laden harvest-fields by bank-full srreams. 140
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER Now streams of nickel and black-lacquered steel Crawl slowly on, wheel against padded wheel.
And green and red and gold the lights burn out above Clamorous streets; and few souls hope for love;
Patrician domes fall down, and leave the sky Empty of meaning, travailing but to die.
141
AMY LOWELL
Died May 12t 1923
Whenever I think of you, I seem to hear bell-notes calling Fix)m the frerted tracery of a great proud Gothic tower; Music jangled, frozen and brazen, falling Downwards through a busy city, hour on hour;
Air-bomc lacework of sound: strange that this image should be rising
Whenever in casual talk anyone mentions your name:
But you were a challenge, startling and surprising.
In an age of banal achievement and pettier fame.
The asters and the goldenrod on your hillslopes will still be blowing
Autumn on brilliant autumn against the hemlocks* dark
screen;
And the oaks and the maples flare scarlet and gold, but yoi will not be knowing
Them or the lilacs, puiple puffs of smoke on the green Of the great bushes; I only can yet remember
Globed drops of silver rain on the heaxt-shaped leaves, And the cry of the crows over sifting leaves in September;
一But not for that one grieves,一
143
JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
lr is for lack of your vitally fighting spirit
That gave and took blows but never broke dll the last;
A man's in a woman s body一let them portion out blame or merit,
1 only know cliis one tiling, and that it has passed;
Bravely you fought and died; and no other world you wanted
When you left this world behind.
Nor has all of you gone yet; by bcll-noics I am haunted. Music of challenge, how yx>u ring on in my mind!
架
THE MAKING OF LILITH
The Garden of Eden.
Adam is sleeping. God and Satan uatch him from a distance.
God has straight black bair, angry nostrils, bushy eyebrows, eyes like molten metal, and a black beard that hides his mouth.
Satan has golden hair, curling round his forehead and ears, and at the nape of the neck, nostrils sensitive to the scents of the air and the play of the mind, eloquent eyest and a mouth like two strung bows. He has no beard, but a golden down on his cheeks.
God inspires fear; Satan friendliness and love.
GOD
He sleeps well; he is good to look upon;
I am pleased with my handiwork.
SATAN
Ours, I think.
GOD
True, true!
That was our paa;
147
F. S. FLINT
But you forget: I wield the forces I【was my might that whirled This eanh from chaos.
SATAN
You wield them; but I weave them.
GOD
Ah!
SATAN
You put the eanh together, lump on lump. Piled up the mountains, scoop>ed the seas. And traced the rivers;
But bejxjnd that rough-hewing Your wit could scarcely go.
GOD
Wit? Is wit needed?
Arc not my mountains good enough?
My seas and rivers, have they not strength enough?
What does wit add to them?
SATAN
Beauty.
GOO
Beauty?
SATAN
Yes:
It is the texture I have placed upon 148
F. S. FLINT
Your crude creations;
It is the colours I have given to Your monotone;
Yours is the force, it is true,
But mine the skill
That bends and shapes and hues
Your gross endeavours.
GOD
I have no padence with such trifles. Masses are my delight;
Power they embody,
And I am power.
SATAN
Yes, but your bellowing beasts,
They die For want of wit.
You cast nw shapes—more terrible; They die—
For want of wit;
But the bright patterns I have made,
The surfaces I have woven So that the light may break Upon them into colour,
These will oudasc your monstrous dumps Of witless flesh.
God, God, 1 tell you that without me
149
F. S. FLINT
The might of your creacion tumbles down Into a mass of rotten flesh and dung, Stinking in patches on bare rocks and stones Under a vegecable monstrosity.
GOD
Not all have died.
SATAN
No, for my hand has always cast A grain of wit into the mass.
And where die wit has fallen.
There the flesh has striven Against its lumpishness.
And sometimes shaped itself to its end;
And, reaching them, readied beauty.
GOD
But what avails the wit and what【he beauty You say your wit produces?
Nothing is real, only power;
Your beauty is illusion.
SATAN And what are we?
GOD
What! Are we not real?
SATAN
Who can tell?
And what arc we?
150
F. S. FLINT
I do not know.
We are and always have been.
Beyond us there is nothing.
SATAN
Nothing.
We are an image in each other s mind.
But what we are, or whether we exist,
Who can tell?
Can we?
COD
I do not know.
I always find you where I find myself.
I find no pleasure in your schemes and wiles, And yet I let you aid me In making this man, Adam.
Shall we awake him?
SATAN
You let me aid you!
You forget; I helped you to the thought Of a creation made of flesh and wic That should be master on this eanh of yours. Buc let us awaken him.
GOD and SATAN (together)
Adam, awake!
151
F. S. FLINT
Adam rises, butt at the sight of God, jails to bis knees in fear. Satan moves touards biw, and, with a gesture of his hand, bids him rise. He stands gazing at the two deities.
GOD
Adam, my image, my last handiwork,
I have placed you in this garden; ic is yours to rule and order.
SATAN
Adam, my colleague overlooks my pare;
But let cha【be; you cannot understand. Something of me you have in you.
Look all around, and tell me What you feel.
ADAM
Fed?
152
SATAN
You have eyes, ears
ADAM
th and skin.
The birds flying The fishes swimming The animals running The insects crawling The rrees standing.
Their shadows and my shadow
F. S. FLINT
The sun and the light The moon and the darkness The stars and the heavens.
GOD
I made them, and the power in them is mine. SATAN
I shaped 出em, and their beaury, it is mine.
ADAM
I hear:
The wind's voice in the leaves The roaring of the lions and tigers The trumpeting of elephants The howls of the wild cats.
I hear
The birds piping And the noise of waters.
GOD
My voice it is you hear in all these sounds. SATAN
My voice it is, the song within the sounds.
ADAM
I smell:
The earth
The fruic, the flowers, the grasses.
I know the lion and the leopard's track And one leaf from another.
153
F. S. FLINT
I smell
And I remember Things I had forgotten.
SATAN
Satan, this is a subtlety of yours. ADAM
I taste:
The apple and the and quince
The berries and th< ts The different nurs.
Their juices mingle with The juices of my mouth. And I am glad.
Gladness? Satan, there is something more Than satisfaction here.
SATAN
Yes, something more.
ADAM
I couch:
I know the surfaces of things.
The air plays on my flanks and in my hair;
The waters lap my limbs and trunk;
My feet txead the earth and rock;
Smooth and rough and hard and soft the world
GOD
154
F. S. FLINT
Ipu【my hand out;
I cannot reach the scars.
GOD
Is not the earth enough?
SATAN
His mind is working; he will want More than the earrh provides.
GOD
He goes beyond my purpose.
SATAN
Better he should than be a living dod.
When, on my intercession, you agreed To make this man with me, I had a mind To try the leaven of intelligence In greater measure than I had before With the flesh massesyou delighted in.
GOD
Intelligent? Am I intelligent?
SATAN
No. God!
The thought
That bends and guides your power comes from me;
And the straight line of your endeavour cunres From nothingness to shape and thence to beauty一
155
F. S. FLINT
GOD
Grcle and pivot?
SATAN
There you had a gleam!--ADAM
I am hungry;
The wind of your speech Goes over my head;
You have made me, I heard you:
I am hungry;
My belly cries out for food;
And I hear your talk and your words. My heart is empty;
I feci ic aching;
And I find no food for it,
None, and the days pass,
And the darkness is bitter;
And you talk before me,
Words that go by me;
My head is hungry;
It seeks and it knows not:
My eyes look out on the world,
And ask and there is no answer;
I am hungry,
Give me food:
You made me.
H6
GOD
F. S. FLINT
(drawing himself upf eyes burning, arms raised) Miserable wretch, annihilation...
SATAN
Gently, God!
Do not destroy him!
His tricks
Will entertain me as he grows and changes. Besides, there is some reason—
GOD
Yes, your reason.
SATAN
If you will.
He argues, if his babble can be called An argument, that we, in making him,
Have given him three hungers,
Which we muse satisfy because we made him.
GOD
Two, I think.
SATAN
You think!
No, three:
The hunger of the belly—
That was petulance, for there is food in plcnry; Next, a hunger of the heart一
157
F. S. FLINT
I am lonely:
The dogs have mates;
The lion sleeps with the lioness,
Mammoth with mammoth, bird with bird;
I am alone;
I am alone.
GOD
I know his second hunger; but his third? SATAN
The hunger of the mind.
GOD
A phantasy—
SATAN
Of my invention: I have placed in him Not knowledge—what is knowledge?~but a desire
To know—co probe and build a phantasy Of nothing out of nothing, wondering For wonder s sake, though he will call it Pursuit of knowledge,—knowledge, music, art, Poetry, while I stand aside and watch,
Amused, the pattern of his busy mind, Knowing it is a pattern and no more.
ADAM
Satan, your subtleties are weak and vain.
158
F. S. FLINT
adam (chanting)
The wind blows on my body; he lifts up my hair; He drives the leaves after me when I walk.
1 am alone! I am alone!
He is mighty; he is friendly; I cannot sec him; The waters rise before him, break and scatter; I am alone! 1 am alone!
He dwells behind the sun and moon and stars; And his breath is around me; I cannot sec him; 1 am alone! I am alone!
SATAN
His second hunger we must satisfy. GOD
And the third?
SATAN
That wc cannot satisfy.
It is implanted in him as a goad To prick him on the road to his desire;
And where he rests to dream, there he will build
Scructures abominable So they will seem—
Out of his weakness and his strength.
He is a seeker who shall never find;
He is a maker who shall make in vain;
159
F. S. FLINT
He is a plougher of an empty field;
He is a watcher who shall only see The figments of his mind and chink them truth. GOD
Satan,
This hunger of the mind tha【so delights you,
I cannot understand, nor what you hope To come of it.
SATAN
It is a decoration of my thought My own perfection cannot break into.
Power in itself is nothing, without thought; Intelligence is nothing without power; Together they are nothing without fonns; These are the forms; this universe, this man; Panaking of your power and my thought. Projected from us but within us still;
Able to move without us and to shape On the blank surface of our nothingness A physiognomy, perhaps a grace.
ADAM
Howl, you hyenas;
Yelp, you wandering dogs;
Spit, cats:
We are Saran*s dream and plaything.
Tear, you lions;
160
F. S. FLINT
Kcnd, you long-toothed tigers;
We are God*s power made flesh.
SATAN
Peace, Adam!
(To God)
He must have his mare.
GOD
I will make her.
SATAN
No:
Togerher we muse make her, as we made
Her man.
GOD
So be it.—Adam, sleep.
SATAN
Adam, dream.
Adam sinks down once more, with a wild look in his eyes. God and Satan approacht one on each side of himf l/ft their arms above their heads, and, joining them, form an arch over Adam. Immediately, there is a flash of light, and an incandescent flame envelopes the bodies of God and Satan, who are now seen as an arch of white fire. From this arch, coloured flames dart out, until the space beneath it is filled with them. These flames gradually take the shape, dimly at firsty of a uoman, whose outline grows firmer and firmer,
161
F. S. FLINT
until 5he becomes fully embodied, and is held suspended in an aureole of fire. As the making of Ulith approaches its end, that part of the arch which is Satan is seen to give way slowly, until fully two-thirds of the span is occupied by God. At the beginning, Gabriel and Michael come on to the scenef and Pan appears among the trees. Gabriel and Michael chant an anti phony throughout t while at intervals Pan plays on his pipes a song that is heard as both tune and words.
GABRIEL
We praise you, O God;
Wc know you to be the Lord.
MICHAEL
The whole earth worships yout O Father everlasting.
pan (on his pipes)
Bind her brow with flowers,
Sweet-smelling marjoram;
Let her come with snowy feet,
O Hymenaeus Hymen,
Let her come with laughter.
GABRIEL
All Angels cry aloud to you;
The Heavens and all the powers therein.
X
MICHAEL
Cherubim and Seraphim cry Holy, holy, holy.
162
Lord God Almighty.
pan ( on his pipes)
O Hymenaeus Hymen,
O Hymen Hymenacus!
Let her come with marriage songs, Full of desire for her bridegroom Who awaits her filled with desire. GABRIEL
The earth is full of your majesty; Your glory shines in the heavens. MICHAEL
You are the King 〇£ Glory,
And wc worship your name, O God.
PAN (on his pipes)
Come forth, O bride.
From the golden【resses of flame.
Io Hymen Hyrmenaeus io.
Come forth, O bride.
潦
WINTER-NIGHT SONG
My dearest dear, my honey love; my brown-eyed squirrel, my soft dove;
All tiny furred and feathered things
have long curled up and furled up their wings.
The taxi-lamps and street lights too grow dim along Fifth Avenue,
And in【he doorways of the shops slumber the dawn-awaiting cops.
A thousand miles of frozen lands do veil our eyes and part our hands;
We vc sundered, we have burnt our ships; a thousand miles do part our lips.
The sirens calling from the Sound taunt me across the iqr ground,
The cold sea-sirens of the main, taunting:
"Ye never shall, ye twain,
Se【sail to sail【he world around,
and round and round and round again.”
167
FORD MADOX FORD
But not King George nor Genghis Khan could keep my squirrel from her maat Nor Solomon's broad-winged Ef rcets bar to my dove these Greenwich streets,
Who, rwlxt the winds and down【he night, a thousand miles doth wke her flight And who invisible doth creep through the interstices of sleep.
My window s wide, my door s ajar;
I'll hear your coming from afar;
Oh tiny; tiny best，oh best， m all the world from West to Wesc.
Before the stars at dawn depart, quick, quick, your home is on my heart.
You are my strength, you are my peace; my sustenance and my increase;
You are my thought and you do bind the convolutions of my mind.
You are my eyes and what I see and you, the blossom of my tree; You are my rhythm and my tune and you, my lily buds of June.
168
FORD MADOX FORD
You are my sleep, in you I wake, and you, my tliirsc, my tliirst do slake. You are my hunger and my meat, my honey hair, my aiinble feec.
And your voice speaks when I rehearse the form and content of this verse.
But when night falls, ah then, you prove my brown-eyed squirrel, my soft dove: My dearest dear, my honey love.
TWO SONGS
1. To the rune of Rokenope How many miles to Gotham town? Must we be there by Monday noon? Why if the ship ride on apace,
Over the sea and up and down Ye must be there as soon.
Oh Gotham were a pleasam place If it were not that you and I Within a barren stony space Shut in from sea and sky That noon must say goodbye.
Must say goodbye that noon and part For noons and dawns and afternoons And twilighrs, heavy, heavy heart,
Full many, many harvest moons Must rise and ride the sky a-down Ere we next meet in Gotham town....
FORD MADOX FORD
If but all screws would fall from ships,
If but all docks stood srill at noon,
Were there no parting for dear lips Nor bitcemess in any tune Gotham might be a pleasant place For all the rest; but you and I Should bide and balance in this space Between the sea and sky.
Too few, too few the miles to Gotham town:
Wc shall be there my Monday noon.
The tall ship hastens on apace Over the sea and up and down.
We shall be there too soon.
2. To the tunc of Nicolette au clair Visage
he And how lon^ shall you wait, my dear,
My dear of the clear face?
she Till the first thin snowfall of the year Fades from its place
Or maybe dll the last ligh【snows of spring
Disintegrate
I may stay here and wait.
HH How long shall you be true, my love,
My love with the clear eyes?
172
FORD MADOX FORD
she Until the bracken in the autumn grove 'Neath Rokenhope Hills Fades down and dies Or maybe til! next year the daffodils Amongst the grass shall rise.
SHE How long shall you be sad, my man,
My man of the clear heart?
HE Until the last leaf of the last year's span For ever and aye departs,
Till the last rose of Earth's final June Yellows and dies:
And, on, until above this sphere The last sun shall arise And the dying stars and the dead moon Fall from the skies.
173
0
TRUE LOVE AT LAST!
The handsome and self-absorbed young man looked at the lovely and self-absorbed girl and thrilled.
The lovely and seif-absorbed girl
looked back at the handsome and self-absorbed man
and thrilled.
And in that thrill he felt:
Her self-absorption is even as strong as mine!
I must see if I can t break through it And make her interested in me.
And in that thrill she felt:
His self-absorption is even stronger than mine!
What funt stronger than mine!
I must see if I can't absorb this Samson of self-absorption.
So they simply adored each other and in the end
183
D. H. LAWRENCE
they were both nervous wrecks, because in self-absorption and self-interest rhey were equally matched.
181

LUCIFER
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell/' But tell me, tell me, how do you know
that he lose any of his brightness in falling?
He only fell out of your ken, you orthodox angels, you dull angels, tarnished with centuries of sitting on the shelf.
185
療
SPHINX
But why do I feel so strangely about you?
Said the lovely young lady, half wistful, half menacing.
I took to my heels and ran
before she could set the claws of her self-absorbed question-inginme.
or tear me with the fangs of disappointment because I could nor answer the riddle of her own selfimportance.
187
搴
INTIMATES
Don't you care for my love? she said bitterly.
I handed her the mirror, and said:
Pkase address these questions to die proper person! Please make all requests to head-quarters!
In all matters of emotional importance please approach the supreme authority direct!
——So I handed her the mirror.
And she would have broken it over my head but she caught sight of her own reflection and that held her spell-bound for rwo seconds
while I fled.
189


IMAGE MAKING LOVE
Always
ar the core of me
bums a small flame of ancer, cnawine
〇 o o
from trespassed contaas, from hot, digging-in t
Jove.
rrs of
Always
in the eyes of those who loved me well I have seen ar lasr the image of him diey loved and took me, mistook for me.
And always
it was a pretry monkey that resembled me and was a gibe at me.
So now I want, above ail things to preserve my nakedness
from the gibe and finger-clurch of image-making love.
191
ULTIMATE REALITY
A young man said to me:
I am interested in the problem of Realiry.
I said: Really!
Then I saw him turn to glance, surreptitiously, in rhe big mirror, at his own fascinating shadow.
DELLA primaverra TRANSPORTATA AL
MORALE:
(incomplete)
April
the beginning~~or what you will: the dress
in which the veritable winter walks in spring—
Loose it (again) let h fall (where it will)
a live thing
the buds arc upon it
the green shoots come berween
the red flowrets
curled back
under whose green veil
strain
197
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
the violent trunks and limbs of
the supporting trees— —yellow the arched stick
pinning the fragile foil
in abundance
or
the bush before the rose pointed with green
bent into form open the iron frame
wild onion swifter than the grass
the grass thick at the poet s base
iris blades unsheathed stabbing一
19S
BUY THIS PROPERTY
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS 一the complexion of the impossible (you'll say)
never realized— at a desk in a hotel in front of a
machine a year later—for a day or rwo
(quite so)
whereas the reality trembles frankly
in that its desire
though it was like this in part it was deformed
e\ en when at its utmost to touch—as it did
and fill and give and take —a kind
of rough drawing of flowers and April for all that—
Stop: Go
the rest is all reserved
With this proviso
199
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
virgin (?) negrcss at the glass in blueglass Venetian beads— a green【ruck dragging a concrete mixer passes
in the street—
the clatter and true sound
of verse—
Moral
ir looses me Moral
it supports me Moral
it has never ceased to flow Moral
the faded evergreen Moral
I can laugh Moral
the redhead sac in bed with her legs crossed and calked rough stuff
200
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
Moral
the door is open Moral
diversely
in all parts —the moral is
love, bred of the mind and eyes and hands—
bat in the cross current
between what the hands reach and the mind desires

and the eyes s^e
and see starvation, i【is
useless to have it thought that we are full—
But Apcil is a thing comes just the same一
and in it I see now
whac then I did not know一
201
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
The Academy (St.)
I believe
in the sound patriotic and progressive mulish policies and if elected—
I believe
in a continuance of the pro-tecrive tariff because—
I believe
that the country can t do too much—
I believe
in honest law enforcement一 and I also believe in the righr of the people【〇 make and unmake their own laws—
I believe
in giving the farmer and land owner adequate protection I believe I believe I believe
in equality for the negro and一
202
THIS IS MY PLATFORM
I believe in your love the first dandelion a heavenly blossom at the edge of the concrete—
the fishman s bugle announces the warm wind—
taraaaaaaa
reminiscent of the sea the plumtree flaunts its blossom^encrusted branches—
Stop : Stop
you would kiss' rne，> with kindness":
I love you coo, but I love you
too
Thus, in that lighc and only in thac light can 1 say—
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
Winter : Spring (a copy)
abandoned (?) to you. The world lost—
in you
Is not that devastating enough for one century?
I believe
Spumoni	1.00
French Vanilla	•70
Chocolate	.70
Strawberry	.70
Maple Walnut	.70
Coffee	•70
Tutti Frutti	JO
Pistachio	.70
Qierry Special	.70
Orange Ice	•70
Biscuit Tortoni	
25c per portion
tactus erudilus
Maple, I see you have a squirrel in your crotch— And you have a woodpecker in your hole, sycamore 204
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS No trucking on this street
The soul, my God, shall rise up as a tree
But who arc you? in this monal wind that I at least can understand having sinned willingly.
The forms
of the emocions are crystalline, geometric-faceted. So we recognize only in the white heat of understanding, when a flame runs through the gap made by learning, the shapes of things— the ovoid sun, the pointed rrees
lashing branches
the wind is fierce, lashing the long limbed trees whose branches wildly toss—
205
潦
THE TREES
The trees—being trees thrash and scream guffaw and curse wholly abandoned new with buds— damning the race of men—
Christ，the bastards haven’t even sense enough to stay out in the rain一一
Wha ha ha ha
wheceeeee clacka tacka tacka tacka cacka wha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha
knocking knees buds bursting from each pore even the trunk s self purcing out leafheads—
207
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
The cold wind has had us his own winter long, his kiss did not leave a part of us untouched—
Wailing at the gate heartbreak at the bridgehead—
What gone
and whence returning? Seedless, spent
Science —wheeeee!
ghosts
sapped of strength一 desire dead in the heart—
Philosophy!
—haw haw haw haw and memory broken.
208
Loose desire.
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
*'Do what you please ' We naked cry to you
Listen!
there were never satyrs
never mawiads
never eagle-headed gods—
these were men
from whose hands sprung
love
bursting the wood— Trees were cheir companions—
209
奈
THE WIND INCREASES
the harried earth is swept.
The trees the tulip's bright tips
sidle and
toss
Loose your love to flow
Blow!
Good Christ what is a poet—if any
exists?
2 man
whose words will bite
their way
211
CARLOS WILLIAMS
home~being actual having the form
of mocion
At each twigrip
new
upon the tortured bodies of thought gripping
the ground
a way
to the last leafdp enameled, fluted
and shellsharp—
as love
newborn each day upon the twig which may die
springs your love fresh up
lusty for the sun the bird’s companion—
212
柴
LOVE IN A TRUCK or THE SEA-ELEPHANT
Trundled from the strangeness of the sea一 a kind of heaven—
Ladies and Gentlemen! the greatest
sea monster ever exhibited alive
the gigantic
of flesh where axe
there fish enough for that
appetite stupidity cannot lessen?
213
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
Sick
of April's smallness the little leaves——
flesh has lief of you
eno
rmous sea—
Speak!
Blouaugh! (feed
me) my
flesh is riven—
fish after 6sh into his maw
unswallowing
to let them glide down gulching back half spittle half brine
the
troubled eyes—ripped from the sea.
(In
214
a practical voice) They ought
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS to put it back where it came from.
Gape.
Strange head一 cold by old sailors一 rising
bearded
to the surface—and the only
sense out of them
is that woman's Yes
it’s wonderful biu they ought to put ic
back into the sea where ic came from.
Blouaugh!
Swing—ride walk
on wires—ross balls stoop and
215
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
contort yourselves— But I
am love. I am from the sea一
Blouaugh!
rhere is no crime save the too heavy body
the sea
held playfully—^comes ro che surface the water
boiling
about the head the cows
sca【【ering
fish dripping from
the bounty of ... and spring they say
spring is yeomen in
216
RAIN
As the rain moistens everything as does
your love
bathe every
open
object of the world—
a •
In houses the priceless dry rooms
of illicit love where we live hear the wash of the
There
paintings
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
and fine
metalware oven stuffs— all the whoreishness of our
delight
from its window the spring wash of your love
【he falling
rain—
the trees arc become beasts fresh risen from
the sea— water
218
trickles
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS from the crevices of their hides—
So my life is spent
to keep out love with which she rains upon
the world
of spring
drips
so spreads
the words far apart ro let in her love
and running in between the drops
the rain
219
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
is a kind physician
the rain
of her thoughts over the ocean
every
where
walking with invisible swift feet over
the helpless
waves—
Unworldly love that has no hope of the world
and that
cannot change the world co its delight
220
the rain

WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS falls upon the earth and grass and flowers come
perfectly
into form from its
liquid
clearness
but love is
unworldly
and nothing comes of it but love
following
and falling endlessly
from
her thoughts—
221
THE FLOWER
A petal, colorless and without form, the oblong towers lie
beyond the low hill and northward the great bridge stanchions,
small in the distance have appeared pinkish and incomplete一
It is the city,
approaching over the river. Nothing
of it is mine, bur visibly it is
petal of a flower for all that—my own.
暴	w
Ir is a flower through which the wind combs the whitened grass and a black dog
with yellow legs stands earing from a garbage barrel. One petal goes eight blocks
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
past two diurches and a brick school beyond the edge of che park where under trees
leafless now, women having nothing else to do sit in summer—to the small house
in which I happen to have been bora:
A heap of dirt, if you care
to say it, frozen and snow-streaked in the January sun returning—
Then they hand you—they who wish to God you*d keep your fingers out of
their businessscience or philosophy or anything else they can throw off
to distract you—But Madame Leninc is a benefactress when under her picture
in the papers she is quoted as saying: Children should be especially protcaed
from religion. Another petal reaches to San Diego, California, where
224
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS a number of young mcnt New Yorkers most of them, arc kicking up the dust.
A flower, at its hean (stamens, pistil etc.) is a naked woman, about 38, just
out of bed, worth looking at both for
her body and her mind and what she has seen
and done. She it was put me st，aigh【 about rhe dry when I said 'It
makes me sick to see them run up a new bridge like that in a few montlis
and I can’t find time even【〇 ger a book written/* 'They have the power,
that's all," she replied. That s what you all want. If you can*t get it, acknowledge
ar least wliat it is. And ihey re not going to give it to you.—Quite right.
For years I vc been rormented by that miracle, the buildings all lit up—
225
WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS
unable to say anything much to the point chough it is the major sight
of this region. But foolish to rhapsodise over stringsoflights, the blaze of a power
in which I have not die least part一 Another petal reaches
into the past, to Porto Rico
when my mother was child baching in a
river and splashing water up on
die ucca leaves to see it roll back pearls.
The snow is hard on the pavements. This is no more a romance chan an allegory,
I plan one thing一that 1 could press buttons to do the curing of or caring for
the sick that I do laboriously now by hand for cash, to have the time
when I am fresh, in the morning, when my mind is clear and burning一to write.
226